"url","text"
"https://www.liberty.edu/","Find Your Degree
At Liberty University, you can tailor your associate, bachelor’s, master’s, or doctoral degree to match your area of interest while studying at our Central Virginia campus or globally online. Certificates are also available at both the undergraduate and graduate level.
Browse Undergraduate Degrees
Browse Graduate Degrees
Training Champions for Christ
Join us at Liberty University where you’ll prepare for a successful career while we prepare you for life. With over 700 programs of study, state-of-the-art technology, and a gifted faculty, Liberty will equip you to enter a competitive job market. Learn, develop, and grow at Liberty so you can impact your culture as a Champion for Christ.
Tour Our Growing Campus
Imagine yourself right here in Virginia at Liberty University. You could be meeting friends on the steps of Montview Student Union or headed to Jerry Falwell Library for a quick study session. Picture yourself walking across our expansive academic lawn or getting ready for the next big game at Williams Stadium.
Start Virtual Tour
Take an On-Campus Tour
Liberty News"
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/","News & Events 
Shining Bright
The Class of 2023 sat under the lights of Williams Stadium to listen to an inspiring message from Franklin Graham before watching a fireworks show, the perfect finale to the celebration.
Read View the E-Magazine version of this issue View E-Magazine 
Featured Articles
Overwhelming Grace
Since giving her past of addiction, fear, and darkness over to the Lord, Whitney Harris (’23) has forged a new life for herself while earning her BSN through Liberty’s School…
June 21, 2023 in Alumni 
Keeper of the Mission
While serving as interim president, Jerry Prevo was often asked about his vision for Liberty, and he would always point back to Dr. Falwell’s vision — the vision that started…
June 22, 2023 in Faith & Service 
Running in the Land of Opportunity
Liberty University alumnus and U.S. Army Capt. Sam Chelanga (’11) is leaning on his faith as he looks to represent his country through both his military service and as a…
June 22, 2023 in Athletics, Alumni 
In first visit to LU, Gov. Ron DeSantis wages war on woke
Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis shared the importance of fighting for truth amid a culture that has seen the woke agenda rapidly gain ground in recent years. …
June 22, 2023 in News & Events 
The Gift of Family
Liberty University founder Dr. Jerry Falwell’s heartbeat for children still pulses in the lives of many families who have been blessed by adoption, including the family of Callie and Kendra…
June 22, 2023 in Alumni 
‘Challenge Accepted’
The announcement of Maj. Gen. (Ret.) Dondi E. Costin, Ph.D., as Liberty University’s sixth president and Jonathan Falwell as the university’s third chancellor was a commissioning service for two men…
June 22, 2023 in News & Events 
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/scaremare/","No Bags Allowed inside Scaremare! Please be prepared to go through metal detectors.
Scaremare 2023
October 12-14, 19-21, & 26-28 
Price of Admission
Admittance is only $5 for military personnel and college students on Thursdays Must have a valid college or military I.D. (one ticket per I.D.) 
Individuals
$12 PER PERSON. CASH ONLY.
Passes must be purchased at the gate. No individual passes will be pre-sold.
SCAREMARE OPENS AT APPROXIMATELY 7:30 P.M. EACH NIGHT.
GATES TO SCAREMARE CLOSE AT
11 P.M. AS LONG AS YOU ARE IN LINE YOU WILL STILL BE ADMITTED.
* We advise against bringing children under the age of 13
Groups
Groups of 15+ must purchase passes in advance in order to secure a rate of $10 per person. Groups must purchase their passes at least 24 hours in advance.
Purchase group passes.
SCAREMARE OPENS AT APPROXIMATELY 7:30 P.M. EACH NIGHT.
* Groups who pay online using a credit card will be assessed a $1 per ticket service fee upon online checkout. To avoid this $1 service fee groups may call the ticket office (434-582-7328) and have them charge their credit card over the phone.
** All pre-purchased Group tickets will be held at the Scaremare ticket booth on-site. Groups must wait in the General Admission line; tickets will be given to the group leader once the group arrives at the ticket window. Tickets will not be available for early pick-up.
Lineslashers
Groups of 15+ can avoid long lines by purchasing $14 Lineslasher passes for each person in their group. Lineslasher passes guarantee entry into Scaremare within 30 minutes of your scheduled appointment. Lineslasher passes must be purchased online. Passes must be purchased at least 24 hours in advance.
Purchase Lineslasher passes
SCAREMARE OPENS AT APPROXIMATELY 7:30 P.M. EACH NIGHT.
*All Lineslasher passes should be picked up on-site at Scaremare through the “Lineslasher Check-in.” Passes will not be available for early pick-up.”
Scaremare Location
2300 Carroll Ave. Lynchburg, VA 24501
Parking is first come first serve.
GET DIRECTIONS TO SCAREMARE
About Scaremare
Scaremare presents fun-house rooms and scenes of death in order to confront people with the question “What happens after I die?”
Groups of people experience a 40-minute journey, passing through creepy trails, dark woods and eventually entering the House. At the end of the experience, visitors are presented with an answer to this question and given the life-changing message of Jesus Christ. Approximately 26,000 people have made decisions for Christ over the past two decades. Ironically, this House of Death points to the Way of Life!
Scaremare has been held at four different locations, including a mansion in Amherst County and an old hospital in downtown Lynchburg. It presently operates at 2300 Carroll Ave, Lynchburg (the City Stadium exit, off of US Route 29 North)
Scaremare project continues in the planning process year— round, but swings into high gear from August through November. The House is open to the public during the last three weekends in October
Thousands of volunteer hours go into preparations of this project. It takes a cast of 300 Liberty University students to operate the House each night. Scaremare is sponsored by the Center for Youth Ministries at Liberty University.
Since 1972, more than 300,000 people from several states have made the trip through the House of Death that you are about to take.
The House attracts over a thousand people every Thursday night. Fridays and Saturdays can typically average between 2,000 and 4,000. The all-time record for attendance on one night was 4,500 in 2007.
Scaremare is carefully planned with safety in mind. Strict building, fire and insurance codes are maintained in the House and on its properties. Liberty University Police Department, fire, EMS and security personnel are on the premises at all times. In the event of an emergency, Liberty University Police Department, fire, EMS and security personnel will respond quickly and professionally.
Testimonials
“Scaremare gave me the opportunity to make my friend think about her life. Whether she will ever come to believe in God and accept Him into her life, I don’t know but at least she has to think about it and make her decision. Thank you for giving me the chance to share Christ with her through the whole Scaremare experience.” 
“I just wanted to let you know that we visited Scaremare for the first time this past Saturday evening and we thought it was excellent. My husband and I took our son and his friend through the house and were very impressed by the way it was prepared! You should feel very proud of your accomplishment.” 
“I just wanted to say SCAREMARE IS AWESOME!!” 
“I would just like to say that Scaremare is great. I think it is well worth the wait to get in. I would also like to thank all of the volunteers for making it very scary and spooky for all to enjoy, they do a great job.” 
“I would like to commend you on the wonderful job that you all did. Every volunteer that I spoke with was friendly, helpful and courteous. The scare house was great! It was realistic and thought provoking. I look forward to the follow-up that will take place with some of my students in the next few weeks as a result of the experience at Scaremare.Thank you again for this ministry and this effective tool for spreading the wonderful news of our Lord Jesus. May God richly bless the ministry of Scaremare and also each individual that worked on the project” – Minister to Students, VA 
“Last night I went to Scaremare, it was the scariest Haunted House I have been in, and it also had the best message. We traveled 4 hours there from VA Beach and back but it was worth it. My best friend and her brother got saved, and I was so happy for her. All I could do was hug her. I think Scaremare is a really good idea, and it should keep going!” 
“It’s been almost a year and Scaremare is still ministering my walk with God. I’ve gone through a few fun/death houses. Actually I’m even a part of one in Miami, FL. Scaremare is a … stunning way to draw the lost to redemption, and to quicken a holy living in the believer. It may not be for everyone, but most needed it. Thank you LU for making it all happen.” – Melissa 
“Growing up in Holland, things surrounding my faith were always very different. I lived in Holland for 17 years and then moved to America to attend a year in high school. I went with some of the students from my youth group to Scaremare. I remember being scared out of my mind, but having a great old time. I remember walking into the tents at the end thinking this does not look like fun. A Liberty student started talking about how without Jesus you could not get to God. The student drew in the sand with a stick to explain that on one side, there was me and on the other side, there was God. He explained that in order to get to God you have to go through Jesus. When the student was done, he prayed with us and during prayer, he asked if any of us would like to accept Jesus and if we would, to raise our hand. Everything now making total and complete sense, I raised my hand. I am grateful every day for an outreach like Scaremare because it is such a great way to reach students today.” – Lynn"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/","We know that when making a big decision like where to go to college, a campus visit can make all the difference. Visiting the place that could potentially be your home for the next four years is the best way to get a feel for what college life could look like. From dorm rooms to classrooms to the dining hall, a visit can help you picture yourself fitting in on campus.
We think you’re going to love life at Liberty, so we can’t wait to welcome you to campus — no matter how you choose to visit! 
TourLU
Want to hit the highlights of LU? Take one of our daily campus tours!
Anyone is welcome to join
Tour is approximately 4 hours
Available times are Monday-Saturday at 9 a.m. and 2 p.m. and Sunday at 2 p.m.
Interested in bringing your group of 10 or more to visit Liberty University?
ExperienceLU
ExperienceLU is a single-day event that allows you to dig deeper and learn more about the Liberty experience.
High school second-semester sophomores, juniors, and seniors invited
This is an all-day interactive tour of campus
Event occurs on select dates throughout the year
DecideLU
Ready to make your next LU decision? Start your journey or take your last steps toward becoming a Liberty student during this single-day event.
High school second-semester sophomores, juniors, seniors, and college transfer students invited
This is an all-day event with a variety of sessions and tours
Event occurs on select dates throughout the summer
College For A Weekend (CFAW)
Learn what it’s like to be a college student when you spend an entire weekend with us at Liberty University!
High school second-semester sophomores, juniors, seniors, and college transfer students invited
Activities are available for the whole family
You’ll enjoy three days exploring campus
Event occurs during two weekends in the fall and two in the spring
Our Visitors Center team is here to assist you with any questions you have about your upcoming visit. Let us know how we can help you!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/orderayearbook","Order your copy!
The Liberty University Selah Yearbook
Our staff’s primary goal is to serve as a record keeper for the university. We cover all the news that take place during the year from construction, events, student profiles, and current events. Not only do we feature the residential campus but we also include our online campus as well. Each portion is essential to the university so we do our best to showcase both.
So that more students can take advantage of the yearbook, we offer a print and online edition of each book. You can purchase the printed version or view the complimentary online version. Check out what you can expect to see in the printed edition below!
What’s included in the print version?
On-campus events
Student profiles
Liberty in the news
Construction updates
Student quotes
Team and club photos
Current graduates’ names (residential and online undergrad and post-undergrad)
And more!
What’s included in the online version?
All of the content found in the print version
The 2019-20 book is in production and will be completed late summer of 2020. Orders will be shipped out immediately following completion.
*Note that a portrait of each student is not featured in the yearbook. Due to the size of Liberty’s student body, we are not able to include the name/photo of each student."
"https://www.liberty.edu/libertychampionpracticum","Liberty Champion Newspaper Practicum
Build your portfolio with hands-on newspaper experience. The Liberty Champion gives you the opportunity to bring what you’ve learned in the classroom right into the newsroom.
Read the Liberty Champion
Enjoy interview opportunities with high-profile leaders. Learn how to meet real-story deadlines in news, sports, feature, and editorial writing. And gain the print and web writing skills you’ll need as a professional journalist.
Through your Liberty Champion practicum, you’ll be exposed to the entire production process in a news media setting, and get real experiences that translate into marketable skills.
The Liberty Champion
One of the largest weekly community papers in Central Virginia
Published 11 times each semester
Circulated through various community channels with 15,500 copies printed per issue
Updated weekly on the web at Liberty.edu/Champion."
"https://www.liberty.edu/news","Media Resources
Looking for media information?
Photographs
Videos
Quick Facts
News Tips
If you have news about Liberty you’d like to share, email
news@liberty.edu
Read the Liberty Champion
Read the latest issue of the student newspaper
https://www.liberty.edu/champion/"
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/","The Light is a Top 40 College Christian radio station. We play Christian Modern Rock, Hip Hop and R&B as well as other popular Christian songs. Students produce the majority of our broadcast day, aired from Liberty University. In addition to our regular music programming we also air specialty music shows, newscasts, sports and Liberty Campus Church Services."
"https://www.liberty.edu/request-information/?page_placement=global_header","What degree level would you like? * 
Undergraduate Graduate Doctorate 
Please select one of the above options 
Starting Term* Please select a term Desired Major* Please select a desired major 
Email Address* Please enter a valid email address 
Legal First Name* Please enter your first name 
Legal Last Name* Please enter your last name 
Full Address* 
Please enter address
Phone Number* Please enter valid phone number 
Parent/Guardian First Name 
Parent/Guardian Last Name 
Relationship to Student 
Parent/Guardian Email Address 
By submitting contact information through this form, I agree that Liberty University and its affiliates may call and/or text me about its offerings by any phone number I have provided and may provide in the future, including any wireless number, using automated technology. 
Message and data rates may apply. For additional information, text HELP to 49595 or 49596. You may opt-out at any time by sending STOP to 49595 or 49596. Visit for Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy 
What degree level would you like? * 
Undergraduate Graduate Doctorate 
Please select one of the above options 
Desired Major* Please select a desired major 
Email Address* Please enter a valid email address 
Legal First Name* Please enter your first name 
Legal Last Name* Please enter your last name 
Full Address* 
Please enter address
Phone Number* Please enter valid phone number 
By submitting contact information through this form, I agree that Liberty University and its affiliates may call and/or text me about its offerings by any phone number I have provided and may provide in the future, including any wireless number, using automated technology. 
Message and data rates may apply. For additional information, text HELP to 49595 or 49596. You may opt-out at any time by sending STOP to 49595 or 49596. Visit for Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy 
Grade Level(s) of Interest * 
Elementary School Middle School High School Dual Enrollment 
Please select a grade level
Email Address* Please enter a valid email address 
Legal First Name* Please enter your first name 
Legal Last Name* Please enter your last name 
Full Address* 
Please enter address
Phone Number* Please enter valid phone number 
Parent/Guardian First Name 
Parent/Guardian Last Name 
Relationship to Student 
Parent/Guardian Email Address 
By submitting my contact information through this form, I agree that Liberty University (including Liberty University Online Academy) and its affiliates may call and/or text me about its offerings and other business matters by any phone number I have provided and may provide in the future, including any wireless number, using automated technology. 
Message and data rates may apply. For additional information, text HELP to 49595 or 49596. You may opt-out at any time by sending STOP to 49595 or 49596. Visit for Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy"
"https://www.liberty.edu/academiccalendar","Liberty Online
Residential"
"https://www.liberty.edu/campusmaps",""
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/","My Accounts
View items checked out, renew materials, access Interlibrary Loan, and more.
View Library Accounts 
Ways to Connect
Ask a question, schedule an appointment, reserve a room, or make a suggestion.
Contact Us 
Journals by Name
Find scholarly journals with our journal search engine.
Search Journal Titles"
"https://www.liberty.edu/giving/?acode=C27223","Annual Fund
The Annual Fund campaign raises money for the day-to-day operations of Liberty and funds student financial aid, academic initiatives, and university facilities. The fund exists to help bridge the gap between tuition and the actual operating costs of the university.
Liberty has a reputation for turning out hardworking, God-fearing students who impact their world and workplace. We need your help to continue the mission of Training Champions for Christ and encourage your gift of any amount.
Give to the Annual Fund"
"https://www.liberty.edu/helpdesk","IT HelpDesk
Search our Knowledge Base
Got a question for us and want to find the answer on your own? We’ve got you covered with over 12 knowledge bases and over 1,000 DIY articles. Here, you’ll get insight into some of the most frequently encountered issues.
Just click the link and type your question in the field provided, and you’re one step closer to your solution. Need extra help? See other support options below.
Faculty & Staff
Business Relationship Manager
Contact your Business Relationship Manager (BRM) to seek advice, request a project, report a problem, and more for your business or academic unit."
"https://www.liberty.edu/offices/","Liberty Online
Residential"
"https://www.liberty.edu/academics/","Academics
Academics Overview
At Liberty, you’ll experience hands-on learning, flexible study options, and advanced academic facilities like our nationally recognized Jerry Falwell Library.
Our university offers undergraduate and graduate degrees through residential and online programs. Choose from more than 700 programs of study.
Study under professors who couple their academic expertise with rich marketplace experience. Grounded in their Christian faith, our professors are committed to helping you succeed both in your studies and in your career goals.
View accreditation information below
Undergraduate Degree Programs
Graduate Degree Programs
Online Degree Programs
Schools & Colleges
Accreditation
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges to award associate, bachelor’s, master’s, specialist, and doctoral degrees.
Questions about the accreditation of Liberty University may be directed in writing to the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges at 1866 Southern Lane, Decatur, GA 30033-4097, by calling (404) 679-4500, or by using information available on SACSCOC’s website (www.sacscoc.org).
The Commission requests that it be contacted to learn about the accreditation status of Liberty University, to file a third-party comment at the time of Liberty’s decennial review, or to file a complaint against Liberty University for alleged non-compliance with a standard or requirement. Normal inquiries about the institution, such as admission requirements, financial aid, educational programs, etc., should be addressed directly to Liberty University."
"https://www.liberty.edu/academics/bachelors/","Accounting & Data Analysis (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Acting (B.F.A.) – Residential
Aeronautics (B.S.)
Commercial/Corporate – Residential
Global Studies – Residential
Military – Residential
American Sign Language & Interpreting (B.A.) – Residential
Applied Mathematics & Statistics (B.S.) – Residential
Actuarial – Residential
Applied Ministry (B.S.) – Online
Aviation (B.S.) – Online
Aviation Administration (B.S.)
Aviation Safety Management – Residential
Flight – Residential
Aviation Maintenance (B.S.)
Management – Residential & Online
Unmanned Aerial Systems – Residential
Aviation Management (B.S.) – Online
Aviation Technology (B.S.)
Flight and Maintenance – Residential
Bible (B.S.) – Online
Apologetics – Online
Christian Counseling – Online
Christian Ministries – Online
Disability Ministry – Online
Humanitarian Action and Human Rights – Online
Theology – Online
Biblical Counseling (B.S.) – Online
Biblical Studies (B.A.) – Residential
Biblical & Educational Studies: Biblical & Theological Studies (B.S.) – Online
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology (B.S.) – Residential
Biology (General) (B.S.) – Residential
Biology Education 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Residential
Biomedical Sciences (Pre-Med) (B.S.) – Residential
Global Studies
Biopsychology (B.S.) – Residential
Biotechnology (B.S.) – Residential
Business Administration & Data Analysis (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Communications – Residential & Online
Data Analytics – Residential & Online
Digital Marketing & Advertising – Residential & Online
Economics – Residential & Online
Entrepreneurship – Residential & Online
Finance – Residential & Online
Financial Planning – Residential & Online
Green & Sustainable Management – Online
Healthcare Management – Residential & Online
Human Resource Management – Residential & Online
Humanitarian Aid – Residential
International Business – Residential & Online
Leadership – Online
Marketing Analytics – Residential & Online
Sales Management & Professional Selling – Residential & Online
Music Business – Online
Project Management – Residential & Online
Public Administration – Online
Real Estate – Online
Strategic Marketing Management – Online
Supply Chain Management – Residential
Business Education 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Residential & Online
Camp & Outdoor Adventure Leadership (B.S.) – Residential
Chemistry (B.S.) – Residential
Chemistry Education 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Resident
Christian Leadership & Church Ministries (B.S.) – Residential
Women’s Leadership – Residential
Christian Leadership & Management: Business Management (B.S.) – Online
Christian Studies (B.S.) – Residential
Civil Engineering (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Coaching (B.S.) – Residential
Commercial Music (B.M.) – Residential
Film Scoring (Film & Media) – Residential
Jazz Studies – Residential
Performance – Residential
Publishing & Producing – Residential
Record, Engineering, & Producing – Residential
Songwriting – Residential
Commercial Music (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Music Production – Online
Communication (B.S.) – Residential
Communication – Residential
Integrated Communication – Residential
Computer Engineering (B.S.) – Residential
Computer Science (B.S.) – Residential
Cybersecurity – Residential
Data Science – Residential
General – Residential
Software Engineering – Residential
Web & Mobile Programming – Residential
Computer Science Cybersecurity (B.S.) – Online
Computer Science Education 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Residential
Computational Mathematics Major (B.S.) – Online
Actuarial – Online
Computer Science – Online
Engineering – Online
Information Systems – Online
Conservation & Environmental Biology (B.S.) – Residential
Criminal Justice (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Advanced Investigative Studies – Residential
Business Administration & Management – Online
Crime Scene Investigation – Residential & Online
Corrections and Human Services – Online
Criminal Psychology – Online
Homeland Security – Residential & Online
Juvenile Justice – Residential & Online
Public Administration – Residential & Online
Strategic Intelligence Studies – Residential & Online
Cultural Engagement (B.S.) – Online
Digital Design (B.S.) – Online
Character Design – Online
Illustration Design – Online
Visual Communication Design – Online
Digital Merchandising Design – Online
Graphic Design – Online
Photographic Design – Online
Media Design – Online
Digital Media & Journalism (B.S.) – Residential
Audio – Live Production – Residential
Audio – Music Recording – Residential
Audio – Post Production – Residential
Church Media Production – Residential
Digital Journalism – Residential
Entertainment Journalism – Residential
Sports Journalism – Residential
Video Editing – Residential
Video Production – Residential
Early Childhood Education Interdisciplinary Studies (B.S.) – Online
Electrical Engineering (B.S.) – Residential
Elementary Education (B.Ed.) – Residential & Online
Middle Grades English – Residential & Online
Middle Grades Mathematics – Residential & Online
Middle Grades Science – Residential & Online
Middle Grades Social Science – Residential & Online
Special Education General Curriculum K-6 – Residential & Online
Elementary Education Interdisciplinary Studies (B.S.) – Online
Engineering Education 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Resident
English (B.A.) – Residential
English Education 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Residential & Online
English & Writing (B.S.) – Online
Christian Literature – Online
Creative Writing – Online
Journalism – Online
English as a Second Language Education P-12 (B.Ed.) – Residential & Online
Exercise Science (B.S.) – Residential
Fitness Specialist – Residential
Strength & Conditioning Specialist – Residential
Therapeutic Science – Residential
Family & Child Development (B.S.) – Residential
Family & Consumer Sciences (B.S.) – Residential
Event Planning – Residential
Professional & Creative Industries – Residential
Family & Consumer Sciences Education 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Residential
Fashion (B.S.) – Residential
Fashion Design – Residential
Fashion Merchandising – Residential
Fashion Merchandising (B.S.) – Online
Creative Design – Online
Fashion Writing – Online
Film Production & Content Development (B.S.) – Residential
Film Production & Creative Development (B.F.A.) – Residential
Interdisciplinary – Residential
Producing Media – Residential
Sound Design – Residential
Storytelling – Residential
Visual Arts – Residential
Fire Administration (B.S.) – Online
Emergency Medical Services – Online
Emergency Management – Online
Fire Science – Online
Forensic Science (B.S.) – Residential
Geography (B.S.) – Online
Global Studies (B.S.) – Residential
Government (B.A.)
National Security Studies – Residential
Politics & Policy – Residential
Government (B.S.)
Intelligence – Online
National Security – Residential & Online
Politics & Policy – Residential & Online
Public Administration – Online
Graphic Design (B.F.A.) – Residential & Online
Guitar Performance (B.M.) – Residential
Health & Physical Education (B.Ed.) – Residential
Health Sciences (B.S.) – Online
Healthcare Administration (B.S.) – Online
History (B.A.) – Residential
History (B.S.) – Residential & Online 
Hospitality Management (B.S.) –Residential
Conference & Event Management – Residential 
Human Services (B.S.) – Online
Industrial Engineering Technology (B.S.) – Online
Industrial & Systems Engineering (B.S.) – Residential
Informatics (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Healthcare Informatics
Information Systems (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Accounting Information Systems – Online
Database – Residential & Online
Data Networking – Residential & Online
Global Studies – Residential
Information Assurance – Residential & Online
Information Technology (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Application & Database Development – Residential & Online
Data Networking & Security – Residential & Online
Gaming Design – Residential & Online
Web & Mobile Programming – Residential & Online 
Interdisciplinary Research (B.S.) – Online
Interdisciplinary Studies (B.A.) – Residential
Interdisciplinary Studies (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Interior Design (B.S.) – Residential
International Relations (B.A.) – Residential
International Politics & Policy
Strategic Intelligence Studies
Law & Policy:
Pre-Law (B.A.) – Residential
Pre-Law (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Public Policy (B.S.) – Online
Mathematics (B.S.) – Residential
Mathematics Education 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Residential & Online
Mechanical Engineering (B.S.) – Residential
Middle Education (B.Ed.) – Residential & Online
English – Residential & Online
Math – Residential & Online
Science – Residential & Online
Social Sciences – Residential & Online
Military Studies (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Leadership – Residential
History – Online
International Security – Online
Professional – Online
Resiliency – Online
Music & Worship (B.S.) – Residential
Biblical Studies – Residential
Business – Residential
Open Electives – Residential
Pastoral Leadership – Residential
Women’s Leadership – Residential
Worship Technology (Audio) – Residential
Youth Ministries – Residential
Music Education (B.M.)
Choral – Residential
Instrumental – Residential
Music Instrumental (B.S.) – Residential
Music Vocal (B.S.) – Residential
Music in World Cultures (B.M.) – Residential
Music in World Cultures (B.S.) – Residential
Musical Theatre (B.F.A.) – Residential
Nursing: Accelerated Pre-Licensure (B.S.N.) – Residential
Nursing: Pre-Licensure (B.S.N.) – Residential
Pre-Licensure: Global Studies – Residential
Nursing Dual Degree (R.N. to B.S.N. to M.S.N.) – Online
Community Health – Online
Health Policy – Online
Nursing Administration – Online
Nurse Educator – Online
Nursing Informatics – Online
Nursing: Post-Licensure (R.N. to B.S.N) – Online
Post-Licensure: Global Studies – Online
Paralegal Studies (B.S.) – Online
E-Discovery – Online
Pastoral Leadership (B.S.) – Residential
Physical Education & Health (B.S.), Non-Licensure – Residential
Physics (B.S.) – Online
Physics Education (B.Ed.) – Online
Earth Science – Online
Piano Performance (B.M.) – Residential
Political Science (B.S.) – Online
Pre-Med (See Biomedical Sciences)
Pre-Vet (See Zoology)
Psychology (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Addictions & Recovery – Online
Child Life Specialist – Residential
Christian Counseling – Online
Counseling – Residential
Criminal Psychology – Residential & Online
Crisis Counseling – Online
Developmental Psychology – Residential & Online
Industrial/Organizational Psychology – Residential
Life Coaching – Online
Military Resilience – Online
Sport Psychology – Residential
Public Administration (B.S.) – Online
Public Health (B.S.) – Residential
Health Promotion
Pre-clinical
Public Health 4+1 Accelerated (B.S. to M.P.H) 
Public Health: Health Promotion (B.S.) and Public Health: Community Health Promotion (M.P.H.) – Residential
Religion (B.S.) – Online
Apologetics – Online
Biblical & Theological Studies – Online
Christian Counseling – Online
Christian Leadership – Online
Christian Ministries – Online
Disability Ministry – Online
Digital Discipleship – Online
Evangelism – Online
Global Studies – Online
Humanitarian Action and Human Rights – Online
Next Generation Ministries (NextGen) – Online
Religious Studies (B.S.) – Residential
Biblical Languages – Residential
Global Studies – Residential
New Testament – Residential
Old Testament – Residential
Theology & Apologetics – Residential
Religious Studies: Bible and Theology (B.A.) – Residential
Religious Studies: Bible and Theology (B.S.) – Residential
Respiratory Therapy (B.S.) – Residential
Respiratory Therapy (RRT to BSRT) (B.S.) – Online
Social Sciences (B.S.) – Residential
Social Studies Education 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Residential & Online
Social Work (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Spanish (B.A.) – Residential
Spanish Education P-12 (B.Ed.) – Residential
Special Education (B.Ed.) – Residential & Online
Special Education Interdisciplinary Studies (B.S.) – Online
Sport Management (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Conference & Event Management – Online
General – Residential & Online
Sport Administration – Residential & Online
Sport Communication & Public Relations – Residential & Online
Sport Outreach – Residential & Online
Sport Venue Management – Residential & Online
Strategic Communication (B.S.) – Residential & Online
Social Media Management – Residential & Online
Strategic Communications – Residential & Online
Strength & Conditioning (B.S.) – Residential
Coaching – Residential
String Performance (B.M.) – Residential
Studio Art (B.F.A.) – Residential
Studio & Digital Arts (B.S.) – Residential
Graphic Design – Residential
Studio Art – Residential
Teaching English as a Second or Foreign Language (B.A.) – Residential
Teaching English as a Foreign Language (B.S.) – Online
Theatre Arts (B.A.) – Residential
Theatre Arts (B.S.) – Residential
Theatre Arts Education P-12 (B.Ed.) – Residential
Theology (B.S.) – Online
Theology & Apologetics (B.A.) – Residential
Biblical Scholarship – Residential
Global Studies – Residential
Writing & Literature – Residential
Unmanned Aircraft Operations (B.S.) – Residential
Vocal Performance (B.M.) – Residential
Visual Arts Education P-12 (B.Ed.) – Residential
Woodwind, Brass, or Percussion Performance (B.M.) – Residential
Worship Leadership (B.M.) – Residential
Worship Studies (B.S.) – Online
Commercial Music – Online
Writing (B.S.) – Residential
Youth Ministries (B.S.) – Residential
Zoo & Wildlife Biology (B.S.) – Residential
Zoology (Pre-Vet) (B.S.) – Residential"
"https://www.liberty.edu/academics/masters/","Master’s Degrees
Continue Your Education at Liberty University
Liberty University will equip you as a future leader in the field of your choice, providing you with the training you need to be successful in today’s market. At Liberty, you have the unique opportunity to study with world-class faculty in a distinctively Christian environment.
The Graduate School
Visit The Graduate School to view admissions and degree information for graduate students.
Study Online
Choose from hundreds of online degrees to earn your degree from anywhere.
Master’s Degrees
Concentrations or Cognates in Law Studies are open to currently enrolled Liberty University School of Law J.D. students (Dual Degree program) or Liberty University School of Law alumni"
"https://www.liberty.edu/academics/postgraduate/","Postgraduate Degrees
Strengthen Your Career Skills
Continue to build on your education with a postgraduate degree from Liberty University. At Liberty, you’ll benefit from world-class faculty and facilities as you prepare to further your career.
The Graduate School
Visit The Graduate School to view admissions and degree information for graduate students.
Study Online
Choose from hundreds of online degrees to earn your degree from anywhere.
Postgraduate Degrees
Education Specialist (Ed.S.) – Online
Administration & Supervision 
Educational Leadership – Online
Curriculum & Instruction – Online 
Educational Psychology – Online 
Elementary Education – Online
Middle Grades Education – Online
Online Teaching and Learning – Online
Secondary Education – Online
Special Education – Online
Educational Leadership – Online
Higher Education Administration 
Assessment & Evaluation – Online
Student Affairs – Online
Instructional Design and Technology – Online
Special Education – Online
Education Specialist in Community Care and Counseling (Ed.S) – Online
Marriage & Family Counseling – Online
Pastoral Care & Counseling – Online
Traumatology – Online 
Theology (Th.M.) – Online
Biblical Studies (Non-Thesis) – Online
Christian Apologetics (Non-Thesis) – Online
Church History (Non-Thesis) – Online
Global Studies (Non-Thesis) – Online
Homiletics (Non-Thesis) – Online
Theology (Non-Thesis) – Online"
"https://www.liberty.edu/academics/associate/","Associate Degrees
Begin Your Education at Liberty University
Begin the next step towards a rewarding career with an associate degree from Liberty University. At Liberty, you’ll gain the knowledge and skills necessary to make a positive difference in the world, all from a Christian perspective.
Study Online
Choose from hundreds of online degrees to earn your degree from anywhere.
Associate of Arts
2-year degree"
"https://www.liberty.edu/academics/minors/","Minors Programs
Combining your bachelor’s degree with a minor can expand your experience, knowledge, and training beyond your major. You can channel your electives into a degree minor that adds extra value to your major. Make the most of your college investment with a minor!
Minors Programs
Accounting – Residential & Online
Aeronautics – Residential
American Sign Language – Residential 
Apologetics – Online
Apologetics and Cultural Engagement – Residential
Arabic – Residential
Autism – Online
Aviation Safety – Residential
Biblical Greek – Residential
Biblical Languages – Residential
Biblical Literature – Residential
Biblical Studies – Residential & Online
Biology – Residential
Biomedical Sciences – Residential
Business – Residential & Online
Camp and Outdoor Adventure Leadership – Residential
Chemistry – Residential
Chinese – Residential
Christian Counseling – Online
Christian Leadership – Residential
Christian Ministries – Online
Church Planting – Residential
Cinematic Arts – Residential
Cinematic Arts Production – Residential
Coaching – Residential
Computer Science – Residential
Communication – Residential
Creation Studies – Residential
Creative Writing – Residential & Online
Criminal Justice – Residential & Online
Dance – Residential
Digital Journalism – Residential
Digital Media 
Audio – Residential
Editing – Residential
Performance – Residential
Video – Residential
Writing for Digital Media – Residential
Disability Ministry – Residential
English – Residential
Ethics – Online
Evangelism – Online
Expositional Preaching – Residential
Family Advocacy, Public Policy, & the Future (Dobson Center) – Online
Family & Consumer Sciences 
Family & Child Development – Residential
Fashion – Residential
French – Residential
Geography – Residential & Online
German – Residential
Global Studies – Residential & Online
Government – Residential
Graphic Design – Residential
Health Promotion – Residential
History – Residential & Online
Homeland Security – Online
Information Security – Residential & Online
Information Systems – Residential & Online
International Relations – Residential
International Studies – Residential & Online
Linguistics – Residential
Marriage & Family Studies (Dobson Center) – Online
Mathematics – Residential
Military History – Residential & Online
Military Leadership – Air Force – Residential
Military Leadership – Army – Residential
Music: Brass, Woodwind, or Percussion – Residential
Music: Performance: Voice, Keyboard, Guitar, or Strings – Residential
Parenting & Child/Adolescent Development (Dobson Center) – Online
Pastoral Leadership – Residential
Philosophy – Residential
Photography – Residential
Physical Education & Health – Residential
Physics – Residential
Politics and Policy – Residential
Pre-Law – Residential & Online 
Public Administration – Online
Public Health – Residential
Public Theology – Residential
Psychology – Residential & Online
Sociology – Residential
Spanish – Residential
Special Education – Residential & Online
Sport Outreach – Residential & Online
Sport Management – Residential
Strategic Intelligence – Online
Strategic & Intelligence Studies – Residential
Strength & Conditioning – Residential
Studio Art – Residential
Teaching English as a Second Language – Residential & Online
Technical Studies – Residential
Technology Entrepreneurship – Residential
Theatre Arts – Residential
Theology – Residential
Unmanned Aerial Systems Operator – Residential
Urban Ministry – Residential
Women’s Leadership – Residential
Writing – Residential & Online
Youth Ministry – Residential"
"https://www.liberty.edu/academics/doctoral/","Doctoral Degrees
Prepare to Lead in Your Career Field
With a doctoral degree from Liberty University, you’ll be equipped to confidently lead in your career field. At Liberty, you will learn from professors that teach with a distinctively Christian perspective.
The Graduate School
Visit The Graduate School to view admissions and degree information for graduate students.
Study Online
Choose from hundreds of online degrees to earn your degree from anywhere.
Doctoral Degrees
Administration & Supervision (Ed.D.)
Educational Leadership – Online
Advanced Educational Studies (Ph.D.) – Online
Curriculum & Instruction – Online
Educational Leadership – Online
Instructional Design & Technology – Online
Special Education – Online
Anatomy and Cell Biology (Ph.D.) – Residential
Applied Apologetics (Ph.D.) – Online
Aviation (Ph.D.) – Online
Bible Exposition (Ph.D.) – Online
Biblical Studies (Ph.D.) – Residential
Business Administration (D.B.A.) – Online
Accounting – Online
Executive Coaching – Online
Finance – Online
Healthcare Management – Online
Human Resources – Online
Information Systems – Online
International Business – Online
Leadership – Online
Marketing – Online
Non-Profit Leadership & Management – Online
Project Management – Online
Real Estate Development – Online
Six Sigma – Online
Strategic Management – Online
Strategic Media & Digital Content – Online
Supply Chain Management & Logistics – Online
Tourism Management – Online
Business Administration (Ph.D.) – Online
Entrepreneurship – Online
Executive Coaching – Online
Leadership – Online
Supply Chain & Logistics – Online
Christian Leadership (Ed.D.) – Online
Church Revitalization – Online
Digital Discipleship – Online
Faith-Based Consulting – Online
Ministry Leadership – Online
Next Generation Ministry – Online
Spiritual Formation – Online
Strategic Christian Ministry – Online
Christian Leadership (Ph.D.) – Online
Church Revitalization – Online
Digital Discipleship – Online
Faith-Based Consulting – Online
Ministry Leadership – Online
Next Generation Ministry – Online
Spiritual Formation – Online
Strategic Christian Ministry – Online
Christian Worship (Ph.D.) – Online
Clinical Psychology (Psy.D.) – Residential
Communication (Ph.D.) – Online
Community Care and Counseling (Ed.D.) – Online
Marriage & Family Counseling – Online
Pastoral Care & Counseling – Online
Traumatology – Online
Counselor Education and Supervision (Ph.D.) – Online
Criminal Justice (DCJ) – Online
Homeland Security – Online
Leadership – Online
Criminal Justice (Ph.D.) – Online
Homeland Security – Online
Leadership – Online
Education (Ed.D.) – Online
Curriculum & Instruction – Online 
Educational Psychology – Online
Elementary Education – Online
Instructional Design & Technology – Online 
Middle Grades Education – Online
Online Teaching & Learning – Online
School Administration & Supervision – Online
Secondary Education – Online
Special Education – Online
Educational Leadership – Online
Instructional Design and Technology – Online
Special Education – Online
Education (Ph.D.) – Online
Curriculum and Instruction – Online
Educational Law – Online
Instructional Design & Technology – Online
Organizational Leadership – Online
Special Education – Online
Educational Leadership (Ph.D.) – Online
Engineering (Ph.D.) – Residential
Health Sciences (D.H.Sc.) – Online
Health Sciences (Ph.D.) – Online
General – Online
Exercise & Sport Science – Online
Trauma Informed Care – Online
Higher Education Administration (Ed.D.)
Assessment & Evaluation – Online
Educational Leadership – Online
Organizational Leadership – Online
Student Affairs – Online
Higher Education Administration (Ph.D.)
Assessment & Evaluation – Online
Educational Leadership – Online
Student Affairs – Online"
"https://www.liberty.edu/academics/certificates/","Certificate Programs
Certificate programs are a great way to gain specialized knowledge. Earning an undergraduate or graduate certificate from Liberty University can enhance your existing degree and improve your appeal to employers.
The added educational value of a certificate can give you the competitive edge you need to advance your career or grow in personal enrichment. With over 50 certificate programs available, you are sure to find the one you need.
Undergraduate Certificates
Postgraduate Certificates"
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/","Registrar
Your On-Campus Journey Starts Here
Get the information you need for every stage of your academic journey through the Registrar’s Office at Liberty University. Let us help you complete your educational goals through essential academic processes like registrations, degree conferral, and transfer inquiries.
Through our office, you can stay informed and get the academic support you’re looking for through our safeguarded and accurate record and transcript maintenance and our actively-enforced academic policy and enrollment verification services.
To help keep our procedures as efficient as possible, we offer many of our resources online to help you quickly get what you need.
Questions? Contact us!
We are here for you.
Contact the Registrar
(434) 592-5100
(434) 582-2187 (Fax) 
registrar@liberty.edu
Green Hall, Room 1896 (Student Service Center)
Office Hours
Mon.-Fri., 8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Call Center Hours
Mon. & Wed.-Fri., 8 a.m.-4:45 p.m.
Tue., 8:30 a.m.-4:45 p.m.
Mailing Address:
Registrar’s Office
1971 University Boulevard
MSC Box 710177
Lynchburg, VA 24515
Looking for a particular staff member?
See our staff listing."
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/dcps/","Liberty Online
Residential"
"https://www.liberty.edu/academics/course-catalogs/","Liberty Online
Residential"
"https://www.liberty.edu/policies","The information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to Liberty University.
Policy Directory Home | LU Administration Page"
"https://www.liberty.edu/academics/university-research/","Liberty University Research
At Liberty, We’re Committed to Research
Liberty University celebrates academic curiosity and creativity. We approach research with a spirit of discovery, rushing across the line in the sand that says to go no further. We challenge the idea of the impossible and the unknowable.
Research is actively present across our 17 different schools, each with unique passions and drives. From biology and chemistry to graphic design to medicine, Liberty is opening doors to faculty and students to study and pursue research in their area of interest.
Whether you’re an undergraduate student, a graduate student, or faculty – we have research opportunities ready and waiting for you.
Offices Involved in University Research
Sponsored Programs
The Office of Sponsored Programs helps students and faculty through the research grant process – from submitting your grant proposal through receiving a research award.
Research Ethics
The Research Ethics Office includes the Institutional Review Board (IRB), Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC), and the Institutional Animal Care & Use Committee (IACUC).
Schools Involved in University Research
College of Osteopathic Medicine
The Liberty University College of Osteopathic Medicine (LUCOM) Center for Research supports research opportunities for its student-doctors in their area of interest. LUCOM’s Pre-Clinical Research Elective provides student-doctors with hands-on experience in biomedical research.
Center for Research and Scholarship
Find Research Funding Opportunities
Faculty & Student Research Projects
Psychology
Faculty Dr. Jichan Kim and student Mary Jo Oliver studied forgiveness psychology and looked at the predictors, the process, and the outcomes of forgiveness. Through their research, they hoped to learn more about the interplay between interpersonal, self-, and divine forgiveness.
Engineering
Faculty Dr. Hector Medina and student Carson Farmer focused on the design and implementation of soft actuators and sensors. Their research also involved the design of sensing and control approaches for mechatronic systems.
Modern Languages
Faculty Dr. Jaeshil Kim and student Mai Chi Nguyen were interested in uncovering language-universal and language-particular features in the syntax and semantics of nominal expressions. They also studied contact-induced language changes, especially in mainland Southeast Asia
Liberty’s Annual Research Week Event
Liberty University holds an annual research week where graduate and undergraduate students can showcase their results from months of research through rigorous inquiry and analysis.
Topics range from the implementation of unmanned aircraft in wilderness rescue missions to the effectiveness of drama therapy in treating mental illness to the prevalence of fungal pathogens in newts.
Learn more about Research Week"
"https://www.liberty.edu/casas/","Support for Today. Success for Life.
Get the support you need as you pursue your degree at Liberty University. The College of Applied Studies and Academic Success (CASAS) is here to help make your academic experience a successful one. With Advising Success Services, you have access to professional guidance and cultural engagement opportunities for your personal and academic success. As part of Academic Success, you can take advantage of our tutoring services, writing services, and academic mentoring program to help reach your academic goals. You can also gain marketable skills with Applied Success through our Technical Studies degree or Continuing Education classes.
Schedule with Compass
Compass allows you to make appointments with a variety of services in CASAS. Within Compass, you will be able to choose from two different appointment categories: Appointments and Tutoring/Mentoring. After logging in to Compass, you will also be able to schedule, cancel, or change any of your upcoming appointments. You will also receive a reminder email from Compass@liberty.edu on the day of your appointment. Schedule your appointment today!
Everything You Need for Academic Success
Get Support with Our Advising Success Services
Our Advising Success services help you plan your education and work through your questions about financial aid, housing, personal issues, and scholarships. There is also a place for the international student community at Liberty to gather and share their culture. We also help to ensure the parents and families are up to date on what is happening around Liberty University.
Professional Advising
Fresh/Soph Advising
Junior/Senior Advising
Parent & Family Connections
Gain Marketable Skills and More with Applied Success Services
Prepare for Your Future with Gen Eds
With General Education, you’ll gain the foundational values, knowledge, and skills that will help to expand your horizons and open doors of opportunity in your future, equipping you to become active participants in God’s redemptive work as it relates to that field.
General Education Electives
Frequently Used Links"
"https://www.liberty.edu/casas/academic-success-center/eagle-scholars/","Eagle Scholars Program

We are now taking applications for the incoming Fall 2023 cohort of Freshman.
Apply Here
Eagle Scholars Program
The Eagle Scholars Program provides high-achieving freshmen and sophomores, regardless of major, personal and professional development that cultivates leadership skills for college and beyond. Students build community as they work together through experiential curricula.
Eagle Scholars Program Benefits:
Priority early registration for classes (This benefit begins after students matriculate at LU and the Eagle Scholars Program)
Personal development to prepare you for university leadership opportunities (Resident Leadership, LU Send Now teams, Student Government, etc.)
Professional development training to increase the likelihood of internships and employment.
Preferred Housing choice on the eighth floor of Commons 2. Students enjoy sharing this Hall with other Eagle Scholars. This promotes connecting with others and encouragement for academic achievement.
Alumni Testimonial
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
More Information
Eagle Scholar Program Mission
Frequently Asked Questions
Volunteer and Service Projects
Eligibility & Requirements
Program Eligibility
Residential undergraduate new students with an unweighted high school GPA. of 3.3 or higher. 
*We are currently waiving the minimum requirement of the SAT, ACT, or CLT test scores.
High-achieving students who desire leadership and professional development
Proactive, career-minded students with a teachable spirit
Program Requirements
Complete program application
Maintain a 3.0 or higher GPA
Complete the following required courses: 
Connecting With Others (ESLP 101)
Self Leadership (ESLP 102)
Leading Others (ESLP 201)
Changing Culture (ESLP 202)
*Typically, students in most majors and campus activities can participate in the Eagle Scholars Program. There are exceptions to this. Some Aeronautics majors (i.e. Aviation Mechanics) cannot participate in the Program due to their class and practical training schedule. In addition, NCAA athletes usually cannot participate in the program due to their practice, matches/games, and travel schedules. Applicants in those groups can contact the Program Director and discuss their specific situation.
Program Overview
First Semester Requirements
Class: Connecting With Others (ESLP 101)
Team-building retreat at Hydaway
Small group class settings
Networking events
Freshman and sophomore interactions
Second Semester Requirements
Class: Self-Leadership Development (ESLP 102)
Small group class settings
Individualized service projects
End of spring celebration
Freshman and sophomore interactions
Third Semester Requirements
Class: Art and Science Leading Others (ESLP 201)
Welcome events for new Eagle Scholars
Habitat for Humanity build in Altavista
Individualized service projects
Fellowship and mentoring opportunities
Fourth Semester Requirements
Class: Art and Science Changing Culture (ESLP 202)
Ministry trip to Washington D.C.
Independent group projects and small group class settings
Fellowship and mentoring opportunities
Testimonials
“Spending time with my fellow Eagles while nailing shingle after shingle into the roof of a shelter that would soon be deemed “home” by a loving family is my most cherished memory in Eagles. I was able to do something productive with my time while building relationships and learning new skills. If you offered me the chance, to glorify God, hang out with friends, and learn something new all in one sitting, I’d be there 100% of the time. Eagles in partnership with Habitat for Humanity gave me that chance.”
“My sophomore year, Eagle Scholars empowered me to begin a community service project for a local nursing home. What began as a trip across town to sing Christmas carols ended with several of us in tears listening to the stories of the residents in the home. This project was more than just a grade, but a moment that opened our eyes to the world outside of Liberty University. As students, we often get lost in our own world of studies and friends, but Eagle Scholars always pushed me beyond my comfort zone to serve the community as the hands and feet of Christ. It changed the trajectory of my college career for the better.”
“My favorite memory from the Eagle Scholars program was the New York trip. I could say so many things about those four days, but to put it simply, I believe that it was there that I really experienced and saw what the Eagle Scholars program is all about. “Taking over” Evangel Christian School for a day was a whirlwind of planning and executing and improvising and emotion. I remember sitting in the back of the cafeteria before our day started, watching my friends prepare their lessons and presentations – one of the coolest parts of being a Christian for me is watching those I love do ministry, and I got to do that throughout the trip…It was the perfect way to end my time in the program.”
""My favorite memory from Eagle Scholars would definitely be traveling to New York City. I enjoyed teaching science to the third and fourth graders and seeing how excited they got. I also loved meeting with the older girls and sharing parts of our testimonies. It was amazing to watch God use the testimonies of eagle scholars to help the New York students open up and reach breakthroughs in their own lives. I also grew a lot closer to my classmates during the long bus ride, early morning breakfasts and fun days of exploring the city.""
Eagle Scholars Leadership
Frank DiGregorio
Eagle Scholars Program Director"
"https://www.liberty.edu/honors-program/","Achieve Your Potential
Liberty University Honors Program
Are you interested in attending an accredited Christian university where you learn from caring and credentialed faculty in small, Ivy League-sized Honors seminars with intellectually curious classmates who have an average SAT of 1460?
If you participated in Gifted and Talented programs in high school or if you are academically talented and serious about your studies and seek to be appropriately challenged, you should consider the academic enrichment of our Honors Program along with its merit-based scholarships.
The Honors Program at Liberty is designed to help you achieve your highest intellectual and creative potential with supportive and credentialed Honors faculty.
Eligibility
GPA of 3.5 or higher
60 or fewer college credits completed
28 or above ACT and/or 1330 or above SAT
Review Dates
Complete applications need to be mailed by these postmark dates for consideration:
November 1
December 1
February 1
March 1
Admission to Liberty University’s Honors Program is competitive, and enrollment is limited.
Apply for Spring or Early Decision
November 1
December 1
If you are a transfer or Liberty student and want to apply for the following spring semester, apply by November 1 or December 1 for spring acceptance. Always indicate at the top of the form what semester you are applying for. The postmark date is used to determine application receipt date. For best results, hand carry your packet into a post office and have it date stamped on or before the deadline to make that review. To qualify as a transfer or Liberty student, you must have 12 credits or more with grades (AP and CLEP credits don’t count toward your college GPA). To qualify as a high school student, you must have qualifying ACT or SAT and high school GPA (see how to apply as a high school student).
If you want an early decision for a fall admission, apply November 1 or December 1 of your senior year of high school.
Resources
Honors Program Handbook
Withdrawal Form
Petition Form
Proposal Form
Thesis Guidelines
Chairing a Senior Honors Thesis
Southern Regional Honors Council
Virginias Collegiate Honors Council
Quiz Bowl
Fact Sheet
Fulbright Student Program"
"https://www.liberty.edu/debate/","Who Are We
The Liberty University Debate Team is a representative body of Liberty University that exists to develop its members’ educational skills and apply them at the highest level of national intercollegiate debate competition. The Liberty Debate Team seeks to equip its members for kingdom service in every field and calling so that God’s name may be glorified to the ends of the earth.
Why We Debate
We are undergraduate, residential students in all majors and areas of study. Some of us have extensive debate experience while others are just beginning! There is a place for all experience levels!
We earn scholarships based on eligible high school policy experience or by reaching junior varsity status at Liberty!
How We Debate
Because we think hard and talk fast, you will learn advanced argumentation strategies that develop your critical thinking more than any other speaking activity.
Because we debate and research a year-long topic, you will learn the in-depth research skills needed for your classes plus have the edge on graduate and law school.
Because we argue in both written and spoken forms, you will develop skills that set you apart from other graduates in your field.
Where We Debate
We travel around the country competing against teams from Harvard, Dartmouth, Cornell, Emory, UC Berkeley, the US Naval Academy, the US Military Academy, and Wake Forest to name just a few.
We visit big cities, beautiful campuses, and make connections with students and faculty at universities around the country.
What We Debate
The Liberty University Debate Team participates in intercollegiate policy debates. We debate the year-long topic voted on by member schools of the Cross Examination Debate Association.
We compete at tournaments sanctioned by three national debate organizations: the American Debate Association, the Cross Examination Debate Association, and the National Debate Tournament."
"https://www.liberty.edu/honors-program/quiz-bowl/","Quiz Bowl Team
Quiz Bowl has been called the “varsity sport of the mind.” Teams play games consisting of two 10-minute halves by answering a variety of questions on literature, history, geography, government, the sciences, math, art, popular culture, and sports.
Liberty’s Quiz Bowl team competed in the Big South Conference 2006-2018, winning the conference tournament 11 out of 13 years: 2006-2008, 2010-2013, and 2015-2018. Liberty went undefeated in conference from 2010-2013 and 2015-2018.
Our 2021-2022 teams competed in 5 tournaments: at the University of Virginia (twice), Virginia Tech, the University of North Carolina, and Duke. Presented here are the team’s victories at each venue.
Join the Team
Dr. Jim Nutter, the coach of our Quiz Bowl team, is always searching for new players, so if you have a quick mind and wide base of knowledge, please contact him for a tryout. Practices and scrimmages are 90 minutes long and are held in a conference room near the Honors Office on Tuesday and Thursday nights.
For more information, please email the coach, Dr. Jim Nutter, at jhnutter@liberty.edu.
Like us on Facebook for exciting updates, tournament photos, and more.
30 Wins, 2021-2022
ACF Fall (Oct. 16 @ Duke)
Liberty 255, James Madison 130
Liberty 265, NC State 140
Liberty 265, James Madison 155
Liberty 275, VA Tech 190
Liberty 260, South Carolina 200
Penn Bowl (Oct. 30 @ VA Tech)
Liberty 210, UVa 145
Liberty 230, ETSU 30
Liberty 190, ETSU 170
Liberty 145, UVa 90
Liberty over ETSU (forfeit)
ACF Winter (Nov. 6 @ UVa)
Liberty 170, James Madison 60
Liberty 260, UNC 35
Liberty 210, Georgetown 135
Liberty 205, James Madison 185
Liberty 200, James Madison 70
ACF Regionals (Jan. 29 @ UNC)
Liberty 205, South Carolina 195
Liberty 155, Duke 110
Liberty 240, UNC 165
Liberty 190, UVa 180
Liberty 115, South Carolina 95
NAQT Sectionals (Feb. 5 @ UVa)
Liberty 475, Virginia Commonwealth 130
Liberty 440, George Washington 90
Liberty 310, Carnegie Mellon 275
Liberty 385, UNC 115
Liberty 300, UNC 155
Liberty 195, Maryland 190
Liberty 270, George Washington 245
Liberty 230, Carnegie Mellon 160
Liberty 170, George Washington 135
Liberty 180, Virginia Commonwealth 90
Past Teams
2022: 30 Wins at Five Tournaments
Kenny Powell, Aleah Schrock, Reagan Nelson (captain), Perry O’Connor, and Aidan Jones before participating in a scrimmage.
The teams scored 30 wins this year, including 4 wins over UNC, 3 wins over UVa, South Carolina, and George Washington, 2 wins over James Madison, Virginia Commonwealth, George Washington, and single wins over Duke, Maryland, Georgetown, NC State, and Virginia Tech.
2021: Ranked 29th in the Country at the NAQT National Tournament
Luke Hancock, Natalie Hathcote, Lillianna Wright (captain), Miranda Boljat, and Tanner Baldridge before competing at the 2021 NAQT National Tournament, hosted virtually.
2020: Natalie Hathcote on College Jeopardy!
18,000 college students took the online test, 250 of those students had in-person auditions, and finally only 15 students were chosen.
Even though team competitions were cancelled Spring 2020, Varsity Player Natalie Hathcote represented Liberty well for an audience of millions.
2018-2019: Third Place Win at the Early Fall Tournament
Micah Protzman, Nathan Cook (captain), Natalie Hathcote, and Miranda Boljat, after a third place win at the 2018 Early Fall Tournament, hosted by Virginia Tech.
2018: Undefeated Big South Conference Champions, 4-0
Leah DePiero, Mark Whitten (captain), Parker Williams, Nathan Cook, and Kristian Myrdal, after the team’s victory at the 2018 Big South Conference, hosted by High Point University.
2017: Undefeated Big South Conference Champions, 4-0
Dr. Nutter (coach), Leah DePiero, Mark Whitten (captain), Kristian Myrdal, Nathan Cook, Micah Protzman, and Whitney Logan (assistant coach) after the team’s victory at the 2017 Big South Conference, hosted at Radford University.
2016: Undefeated Big South Conference Champions, 4-0
Leah DePiero, Mark Whitten, Kristian Myrdal, Tim Magee, Mikah Sauskojus (captain), and Dr. Jim Nutter (coach) after the team’s victory at the 2016 Big South Conference, hosted here at Liberty University.
2015: Ranked 14th in the Country at the ACF National Tournament (And Undefeated Big South Conference Champions, 7-0.)
Jake Rogers (assistant coach), Greta Hanks, Mikah Sauskojus, Doug Stephens, Jon Bateman, Kaity Shondelmyer (captain), and Dr. Jim Nutter (coach). This was our second national tournament, and we won 4 games at the University of Michigan.
2014: Ranked 20th in the Country at the NAQT National Tournament
Jake Rogers (assistant coach), Catherine Hardee, Doug Stephens, Jon Bateman, Greta Hanks, Kaity Shondelmyer (captain), and Dr. Jim Nutter (coach). This was our first national tournament, and we won 5 games in Chicago.
2013: Undefeated Big South Conference Champions (6-0)
Jake Rogers (captain), Kaity Shondelmyer, Jon Bateman, Dr. Jim Nutter (coach), Greta Hanks, & Doug Stephens
2012: Undefeated Big South Conference Champions (6-0)
Kaity Shondelmyer, Andrea Teachout, Dr. Jim Nutter, Corbin Payne, Catherine Hardee, & Jake Rogers (captain)
2011: Undefeated South Conference Conference Champions (5-0)
Jake Rogers, Catherine Hardee, Corbin Payne (captain), Dr. Jim Nutter (coach), Andrea Teachout, & Lillian Otieno
2010: Big South Conference Champions, 5-1
Front Row: Jake Rogers, Eddie Brown (captain), Tyler Flynn, &amp; Jerry Falwell, Jr. (President) Back Row: Dr. Jim Nutter (coach), Corbin Payne, & Jeremy Peterson
2009: Third Place in Big South Conference
Front Row: Sarah Goin, Eddie Brown, &amp; Sara Davis-Leonard Back Row: Corbin Paine, Dr. Jim Nutter (coach), & Zach Curtis (captain)
2008: Big South Conference Champions (5-2)
Sara Davis-Leonard, Dr. Emily Heady, Robbie Mullis, Kelly Hamren (captain), Zach Curtis, & Dr. Jim Nutter
2007: Big South Conference Champions (6-1)
Nick Orta, Clay Finley, Zach Curtis, Zach Smith, & Dallas Shipp (captain)
2006: Undefeated Big South Conference Champions (8-0)
Zach Smith, Clay Finley, Zach Curtis, Brad Salois (captain), & Dallas Shipp"
"https://www.liberty.edu/osd/lu-send/","Travel with LU Send
Are you looking for transformational travel opportunities; a chance to learn, grow and serve through cross-cultural encounters and unforgettable global experiences? Well, you have come to the right place! LU Send is the central hub of support for all student group travel and study abroad at Liberty University. We’re passionate about helping you get off campus to see the world; all while getting academic credit, increasing cultural competency, and serving the Lord around the globe.
Group Travel Opportunities
Get off campus and experience the world with other Liberty University students and professors. You will never forget the places you go to or the people you went there with!
Click below to explore all Professor-led group travel options.
Explore Group Travel
Study Abroad Portal
Take classes toward your Liberty University degree while seeing the world! Grow and stretch yourself and your faith when you Study Abroad!
Click below to see approved study abroad programs or read Liberty student testimonials
Explore Study Abroad Programs
International Internship Portal
Get real-world professional experience in your field of study while working in other countries and increasing your cultural awareness.
Click below to see approved international internship organizations or read Liberty Student testimonials.
Explore International Internships
LU Send Faculty Gateway
Find everything faculty need from requesting domestic excused absences, proposing international study tours, and registering individual university-approved or sponsored international travel.
Click below to learn more.
Get Started"
"https://www.liberty.edu/admissions/","Admissions
Resident Undergraduate
Get your associate or bachelor’s degree here on the Liberty University campus. Choose from more than 200 undergraduate residential programs in a wide variety of fields, such as business, psychology, religion, and education. You can also tailor your degree and target your area of interest through our specialized minors and certificates.
Tuition & Fees
Undergraduate residential base tuition for the 22-23 school year is $23,800, not including any mandatory fees.
Undergraduate Basic Costs
Housing
Experience on-campus living in one of our Residence Halls. Housing options start at $4,850.
Residence Halls
Dining
Meal plans are available for residential and commuter students. Plans start at $4,050.
Flames Pass Meal Plans
Contact
admissions@liberty.edu
Resident Admissions Office Hours (EST)
Mon., Tue., Thu., and Fri. 10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed. 9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Sat. 10 a.m.-6 p.m.
Undergraduate
(800) 543-5317
Graduate
(877) 298-9617
Online Admissions Office Hours (EST)
Mon., Tue., Thu., and Fri. 8 a.m.-8 p.m.
Wed. 8 a.m.-6 p.m.
Sat. 10 a.m.-6 p.m.
Online
(800) 424-9595
Visit Our Campus
Still not sure? Come to campus to see our facilities and talk with an Admissions counselor.
Visit Our Campus
Resident Graduate
Earn your master’s, specialist, or doctoral degree at Liberty. Enjoy classes on campus at Virginia’s largest university and choose from over 100 graduate-level degrees including the Juris Doctor (J.D.), the Master of Divinity (M.Div.), and Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.). Certificates are also available at the graduate level.
Liberty Online
Get the degree you want from anywhere in the world. Liberty’s online programs provide the same quality education as our residential classes, but allow you to schedule your studies around family, work, and other responsibilities. Join our students from around the world who have chosen to study online with Liberty University."
"https://www.liberty.edu/student-financial-services/","Financial Planning
Planning on how to pay for college can be challenging. We’re here to help guide you through the financial aid process and provide assistance with your student account. Don’t stress about student finances, you’ll have enough to do, like hanging out with friends and studying for your classes.
Student Finances
Tuition and Basic Costs
Steps & Forms
Disbursement Process
Federal College Financing Plan
Frequently Asked Questions and Glossary of Financial Aid Terms
International Students
Tax Information
Make it Affordable
Book Vouchers & Dollars
Scholarships
Grants
Loans
Federal Work Study
Deferred Corporate Tuition Assistance
External Aid (529 Plans, Outside Scholarships, and more!)
Liberty University Financial Literacy
Financial Aid Opportunities
Consumer Information
Net Price Calculator
Consumer Information
Non-discrimination Statement and Title IX Information
Satisfactory Academic Progress
Student Loan Consumer Information
Policies
Liberty University, as permitted by federal regulation [34 CFR 668.41], electronically disseminates consumer information, including the Jeanne Clery Disclosure of Campus Security Policy and Campus Crime Statistics Act information. Upon request, the institution will provide a free paper copy. Anyone signing or processing financial aid forms or seeking information or assistance at Liberty University must read, understand, and comply with the requirements disclosed, which are available 24 hours a day at www.Liberty.edu/ConsumerInfo. 
Announcements:
CARES Act
For information and links to the self-certification form for CARES Act funding, click here."
"https://www.liberty.edu/student-financial-services/basic-costs/","Basic Costs
Calculate Your Estimated Costs & Aid
Review the basic costs to attend Liberty University residentially or online. Here you’ll find our annual tuition, housing, dining, and fees for undergraduate and graduate students. Liberty University is freezing most tuition costs again for the upcoming 2023-2024 academic year.
Residential Program Costs
2023-2024 Cost of Attendance Allowances"
"https://www.liberty.edu/npc/userInfo","In a few short steps, you can estimate...
Total Expenses
Award Amounts
Out of Pocket Cost
DISCLAIMER
All figures represented in this calculator serve as estimates only and should never be considered as contractual or guaranteed. Estimated aid is based on the assumption that the student meets all eligibility criteria including meeting Liberty University's priority deadlines. All expense and award estimates are based on the variable response inputs from the user when submitting answers to each question on the Net Price Calculator (such as terms selected). The calculator does not take into account inclusive access, material, or course content fees, which vary by course and program. General program tuition rates are represented on the calculator. Some programs tuition rates may vary. Visit www.liberty.edu/tuition for all tuition rates by program, campus, and level.
This estimator does not serve as an award letter or any other official form of documentation that may otherwise be received from Liberty University.
The estimate does not represent a final determination, or actual award of financial assistance; shall not be binding on the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Education, Liberty University, or any State; and may change.
The student must complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid described in federal regulations in order to be eligible for, and receive, an actual financial award that includes Federal grant, loan, or work-study assistance under Federal Title IV aid programs. Students may complete a FAFSA on the web at www.StudentAid.gov.
Direct costs are charges that would actually be incurred by the student while attending Liberty.
Indirect costs are allowances that are estimated charges based on research and statistical averages - not necessarily actual charges on a student's account.
Estimated military and veteran aid is based on the assumption that the student meets all eligibility criteria. Liberty University does not determine eligibility for GI Bill® benefits, Veteran Readiness and Employment, or military Tuition Assistance (TA). The amount provided above is an estimate only that is based on current Post-9/11 GI Bill® (Ch. 33) regulations. Effective August 1, 2022, the Post-9/11 GI Bill® will be processed using an annual tuition and fee cap of $26,381.37. Please go to the Military Affairs web page, www.liberty.edu/militaryaffairs, or contact the Military Affairs Office, vabenefits@liberty.edu, for more information.
By submitting contact information through this form, I agree that Liberty University and its affiliates may call and/ or text me about its offerings by any phone number I have provided and may provide in the future, including any wireless number, using automated technology."
"https://www.liberty.edu/student-financial-services/grants/","Grants
Grant Eligibility
Grants are a form of financial aid that you do not need to repay. Many grants are based on financial need, and some also take into consideration academic performance, academic degree program, and/or residence status.
You will need to complete your FAFSA to be evaluated for federal grant eligibility.
Children of Fallen Heroes
Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant (FSEOG)
Iraq & Afghanistan Service Grant
Liberty Supplemental Grant
Liberty Scholars Grant Program (Undergraduate)
Two Year College Transfer Grant
Virginia Tuition Assistance Grant (VTAG)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/student-financial-services/scholarships/","Scholarships
Make your college tuition more affordable with scholarships. Review the Liberty scholarship packages below, and apply to all that you are eligible for. The earlier you act, the more scholarship opportunities are available.
Resident Transfer Student Scholarships
Missions Programs & Scholarships
Resident Graduate Scholarships
General Scholarship Rule (GSR)
FAFSA
You must have a FAFSA on file to receive most online Liberty aid, all resident Liberty aid, and all federal aid. If you are selected for FAFSA Verification, you must complete the verification process before being awarded any financial aid.
View Aid Disbursement Processes
Liberty discounts are applied beginning with the term in which you are approved (they cannot be used toward prior terms).
Most full-tuition scholarships cannot be combined with the standard Confirmation Scholarship package (Early Deposit Award, Book Dollars, and Champion Award – as eligible).
Unless otherwise specified in award eligibility criteria, resident scholarships are for prospective, full-time, undergraduate students.
Unless otherwise stated, all Resident student scholarships are only offered for the Fall and Spring semesters.
Featured Scholarship
Liberty’s Middle America Scholarship helps supplement working families and their children with aid that would not normally be available to them. For families earning typically between $35,000 and $95,000, this program could provide over $6,000 in need-based aid for their students every year.
Students with an expected family contribution (EFC) from the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) between 1-18,000 will receive the Middle America Scholarship to bring them up to the equivalent of the full Federal Pell Grant amount each year when combined with the Liberty Champion scholarship.
Learn more about the Middle America Scholarship.
Resident Undergraduate Scholarships
Resident Graduate Scholarships
Liberty University Online (LUO) Scholarships
General Scholarship Rule (GSR)
Resident students’ combined federal grants, state grants, and Liberty aid cannot exceed the combined cost of actual tuition and Tier 2 room and standard board charges (see basic cost page). For commuter students and all online students, the GSR calculation only includes the cost of tuition since there is no room and board direct charge, which means federal grants, state grants, and Liberty aid cannot exceed the actual cost of tuition. If the combined aid exceeds the total cost as specified, Liberty aid will be reduced to resolve the excess aid. The Federal Pell Grant is not included as a factor in the GSR for Resident students. All Liberty aid is subject to the GSR.
Liberty University, as permitted by federal regulation [34 CFR 668.41], electronically disseminates consumer information, including the Jeanne Clery Disclosure of Campus Security Policy and Campus Crime Statistics Act information. Upon request, the institution will provide a free paper copy. Anyone signing or processing financial aid forms or seeking information or assistance at Liberty University must read, understand, and comply with the requirements disclosed, which are available 24 hours a day at www.Liberty.edu/ConsumerInfo.
Liberty University reserves the right to change the terms and conditions of any scholarship at any time at its discretion, as well as suspend or terminate any scholarships.
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government Web site at www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residence-life/","Welcome Home
Experience quality on-campus living that not only provides safe and inviting housing options but also meets your need for community and personal development. Residence Life at Liberty University cares about you and wants to invest in your success in dorm life and future career.
Each hall is equipped with one or two Resident Assistants (RAs) and a team of Resident Shepherds (RSs) and Community Group Leaders (CGLs). Our student leaders are here to get to know you and help you grow. You’ll also attend Convocation as a hall and develop friendships that could last a lifetime.
Take a Virtual Tour of Campus Housing
Thrive On One of the Safest Campuses in Virginia
Our male and female-only residence halls are always locked and have badge access. Resident Assistants (RAs) and Resident Directors (RDs) are equipped to handle crisis response and look out for the safety and the mental, spiritual, and physical well-being of their residents.
Read our On Campus Living Guide.
Become a Leader. Become an RA.
Have a passion for what the Lord is doing at Liberty University and want to be a part of it? As a Resident Assistant (RA), you’ll grow as a leader as you invest in the lives of students.
Become a Resident Assistant
Liberty University Residence Halls
View Housing Selection Information"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/undergraduate/","What does Liberty look for?
At Liberty, we seek to cultivate a culture of respect and grace — one that reflects the biblical fruits of the Spirit (love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control) per Galatians 5:22-23.
We value intellectual ability, academic achievement, and the personal qualities that demonstrate you’ll be a good fit for our campus community and university mission.
Liberty students come from everywhere, bringing with them various experiences, cultures, backgrounds, and dreams for the future. When we evaluate undergraduate applications, it’s with the goal of identifying students who will thrive in and contribute to our unique culture.
The result is an extraordinarily rich mix of students — one of the things you’ll most enjoy about Liberty.
Read More
Liberty’s Admission Decisions
Admission decisions are competitive and are based primarily on the following factors:
Cumulative (unweighted) GPA from high school or college
GED scores (if applicable)
Consistency and trends of grades
Essay submission
Please note: Other documentation such as reference letters, community service, or leadership verification may also be required by the admissions committee on a case-by-case basis.
Admission Standards
50% of admitted students come from within the following mid-ranges:
High School GPA: 3.15-3.83
SAT (ERW* and math only): 1020-1220*
ACT composite: 20-27*
CLT: 63-89
*Evidence-Based Reading and Writing
Liberty University’s High School Requirements
Your high school must be accredited, or meet state standards. Please reach out to the Admissions Team for any questions on this process. For private schools, we can approve schools that are accredited by one of the following*:
ACCS – Association of Classical Christian Schools
ACSI – Association of Christian Schools International
ANSAA – Arkansas Nonpublic School Accrediting Association 
CIS – Council of International Schools
CSI – Christian Schools International
DoDEA – Department of Defense Education Activity
FACCS – Florida Association of Christian Colleges and Schools
ISACS – Independent School Association of the Central States
ISASW – Independent Schools of the Southwest
MSA-CESS – Middle States Association – Commission on Elementary and Secondary Schools
NACSAA – North American Christian School Accrediting Agency
NAUMS – National Association of University-Model Schools
NCPSA – National Council for Private School Accreditation
NEASC – New England Association of Schools and Colleges
NECHE – New England Commission of Higher Education
NWCCU – Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities
SACS – Southern Association of Colleges and Schools
SWAES – Southwestern Association of Episcopal Schools
TRACS – Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools
VAIS – Virginia Association of Independent Schools (Recognized and approved by VCPE) 
VCPE – Virginia Council for Private Education
WASC – Western Association of Schools and Colleges
We will also accept accreditors listed as one of the U.S. Department of Education’s Non-Public Education Organizations.
*If you have questions regarding your high school’s accreditation, please contact the Office of Admissions.
For Private Schools whose accreditation cannot be confirmed:
Have your school submit a self-certification, confirming that their curriculum meets/exceeds state standards.
Statements confirming that state standards are being met on the transcript, can also be accepted.
While there are no specific course requirements for applicants, if you have completed these classes you’ll likely feel prepared for classroom expectations at Liberty. The recommended curriculum includes:
4 units of English
2-3 years of college preparatory mathematics
2 years of laboratory science
2 years of social science
2 years of foreign language
At least 4 units of elective credits
High School Transcript Requirements
Securing your high school transcripts is an important next step to take toward attending Liberty. Check out our requirements for high school transcripts below and see how Liberty can help streamline this process:
High school students: We can make an admission decision based on your preliminary transcripts (grades 9-11). Request unofficial transcripts from your school and upload them to your Student Checklist or have your high school guidance office email them to AdmissionsDocs@liberty.edu. (Note: Unofficial transcripts can be used for acceptance purposes. Liberty will need your final official transcripts prior to you attending.)
Transfer students: We can make an admission decision based on your final high school transcripts. Upload them to your Student Checklist or have your high school guidance office email them to AdmissionsDocs@liberty.edu.
If you submit a Transcript Request Form along with your unofficial transcripts, we’ll be able to expedite your admission decision by requesting the official transcripts on your behalf.
If you need to submit a high school self-certification form you can complete that through the online portal or printable form.
Liberty’s Admission Essay
One of the most important steps in your admission process to Liberty University is the admission essay. Your university personal essay is a chance to let us know who you are in your own words.
Submitting your college essay is required before you can be admitted to Liberty University, and it’s your opportunity to add your voice to your college application. This Liberty admissions essay allows you to share your faith and testimony with us.
Liberty University’s Application Essay Steps:
Step 1
Answer each question in just 100-150 words:
Describe how your personal faith and beliefs contribute to your college search process. (Examples include reasons for choosing Liberty, background information about your personal faith and beliefs, or other information you deem relevant.)
Liberty’s mission is to develop Christ-centered leaders. Describe how you will contribute to this mission as a Liberty student. (Examples include interests in church or community service, personal achievements or goals, or other examples of what you hope to achieve as a student.)
Step 2
Email your essay to admissionsdocs@liberty.edu with “ESSAY” as the subject line. In your essay heading, please include your full name, address, date of birth, and your student ID (if you have it).
Or upload or copy and paste your essay directly into your personalized Student Checklist.
Personal Essay Excerpts
These excerpts are intended to be used as inspiration to help you get started with your personal essay. Copying any part of these texts is not acceptable. 
Describe how your personal faith and beliefs contribute to your college search process.
My personal faith and beliefs have made my college search prayerful and intentional — I know I want to attend a faith-based school like Liberty University because I want an environment that will help me grow in my faith.
Liberty’s mission is to develop Christ-centered leaders. Describe how you will contribute to this mission as a Liberty student.
As a Liberty student, I look forward to developing my event production skills through my program in the School of Communication & the Arts. I’ve been volunteering with my church’s production team for the past two years and enjoy using my passion to help other people experience a relationship with the Lord.
Frequently Asked Questions
What are the requirements for Liberty University?
Is it hard to get into Liberty University?
Does Liberty University use the Common App?
What GPA do you need to get into Liberty University?
Does Liberty University require the ACT?
What is the average SAT score for Liberty University?
Does Liberty University require essays?
What do you write in a university application essay?
Is a degree from Liberty University respected?
Transfer Student Admission Steps
Are you considering transferring colleges? Whether you have recently completed your associate’s degree, are a dual-enrolled high school student, or have credits from multiple schools, we are here to meet your needs as a transfer student to Liberty University. 
We will provide you with clear and flexible options on how to successfully transfer and complete your undergraduate degree, regardless of your goals and background as a transfer student.
Step 1: Unofficial Transfer Consultation
Step 2: Apply for Transfer Admission
Step 3: Submit Transcripts and Documents
Transfer Requirements
We expect you to be in good standing with your previous school when you transfer, but your Liberty University GPA will not be affected by any GPA received at another school. Please review our Transfer Student Policies and Guidelines for all requirements.
Have Any Questions?
Admissions Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m.
Message and data rates may apply. For additional information, text HELP to 49596. You may opt-out at any time by sending STOP to 49596. Visit for Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/tuition-financing/","Tuition has not increased in 8 years for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs
As a nonprofit institution, Liberty University’s online programs have some of the lowest tuition rates among top online universities. Our tuition rates are some of the lowest in the nation and have been frozen for 8 years through June 2024!
What are the financing options?
Scholarships and flexible payment plans make Liberty tuition rates even more affordable.
If you’re wondering how financial aid works, or you’d like to see how you can further decrease your Liberty University cost, please review our page on scholarship opportunities.
Have additional questions?
Liberty University cares about your education and therefore is committed to helping you through the financial aid process.
For more information regarding financial aid and Liberty University tuition online, visit the Student Financial Services homepage.
General Tuition Rates: 2022-2023
Fall 2022, Spring 2023, and Summer 2023
Degree Level	Full-time per hour rate	Part-time per hour rate	
Undergraduate	$390	$455	
Graduate	$565	$615	
RN to BSN, RN to BSN – Global Studies	$330	$330	
B.S.N. – M.S.N (Dual Degree)1	$330	$330	
Master of Education / Master of Arts in Teaching2	$415	$615	
Master of Science in Biomedical Sciences (program discontinued)	$605	$605	
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity Master programs3	$2,750 block rate	$395	
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity D.Min. and Ph.D. programs4	$2,750 block rate 	$395	
Ed.D. in Community Care and Counseling	$595	$650	
Doctorate Programs and Ed.S.
	$595	$650	
Doctorate of Nursing Practice	$595	$650	
DNP-Psychiatric Mental Health Nurse Practitioner (Post-MSN and Post-BSN)5	$1,200	$1,200	
Post-Graduate Certificate in Psychiatric Mental Health5	$1,200 	$1,200	
Military Undergraduate	$250	$250	
Military Master School of Divinity 	$2,475 block rate	$275	
Military Graduate/Ed.D., Ed.S., D.Min. Programs6	$275	$275	
Military Graduate to Doctoral Tuition7	$300	$300	

1The B.S.N.-M.S.N. dual degree program is formatted in a way in which students enrolled specifically in this program will earn their Bachelor of Science in Nursing and a Master of Science in Nursing concurrently.
2Applicable to School of Education programs only.
3Liberty online John W. Rawlings School of Divinity Master of Divinity students enrolled between 1 and 8.99 credit hours will be charged the part-time tuition rate of $395 per credit hour. Students enrolled between 9 and 15 credit hours will be charged the block rate of $2,750. Any credit hours above 15 will be charged at the $395 part-time rate. 
4Liberty online John W. Rawlings School of Divinity Doctor of Ministry and Ph.D. students enrolled between 1 and 6.99 credit hours will be charged the part-time tuition rate of $395 per credit hour. Students enrolled between 7 and 15 credit hours will be charged the block rate of $2,750. Any credit hours above 15 will be charged at the $395 part-time rate. Please note that the Doctor of Ministry – Pastoral Counseling is the only D.Min. track eligible for the military discount.
5Beginning Spring 2022, students will pay a flat rate of $1,200 per credit hour, as opposed to separate part time and full time rates. Those who have begun coursework in the Fall 2021 term or earlier, will be grandfathered into the previous full-time/part-time tuition rate. If a student breaks enrollment or graduates, they will be updated to the new flat tuition rate when they re-enroll. Please note that the flat rate means that new students in these programs will not be eligible for the military discount. Students who are accepted and offered a seat for the Fall 2022 or Spring 2023* semester will be required to submit a $500 deposit. This deposit will be applied to your student account to be used towards tuition, fees, etc. If accepted to our program, you will receive additional information via your Liberty email regarding your next steps and payment of the deposit. (Spring 2023 deposits are refundable until November 18, 2022)
6Doctorate military rate only applies to the Education Doctoral (Ed.D and Ed.S) programs and the following Doctoral Certificate programs: Executive Certificate in Curriculum and Instruction, Executive Certificate in School Administration, and Supervision and Executive Certificate in Higher Education Administration. Military students pursuing other doctorate programs will be charged the regular (part-time/full-time) doctorate tuition rates. Doctoral military students enrolled in Doctorate of Ministry: Pastoral Counseling will be assessed the $275 military rate for 1 to 6.99 credit hours, or over 15 credit hours. Students enrolled in this program for 7 to 15 credit hours will be assessed a military block rate of $1,925.
7Beginning Fall 2020, when you complete a graduate degree through Liberty – including the nested 21-hour advanced certificates – and you continue your studies into a doctoral program within 2 academic years of graduation, you will receive a reduced tuition rate of just $300 per credit hour. The $300 tuition rate only applies to active service members, eligible veterans, and spouses who are new to a doctoral program in Fall 2020 or after. DoD employees are not eligible for the discounted tuition rate at the doctoral level. Both Ed.S. and Ed.D. programs will retain a tuition rate of $275 per credit hour.
2023-2024 Cost of Attendance Allowances
Liberty University Student Financial Services establishes the annual cost of attendance allowances to help students and their families prepare financially for the academic year. The below allowances for online students are estimates and may vary depending on students’ individual spending decisions. These allowances are “indirect” meaning, they are not charged directly to student accounts. Direct charges that are applied to student accounts are listed above in the Online Program Costs sections.
Online Cost of Attendance Breakdown
Allowance Type
	
Full Time
	
Half Time
	
Housing
	
$7,132
	
$7,132
	
Food
	
$2,588
	
$2,588
	
Fees
	
$236
	
$236
	
Loan Fees (Graduate/Doctoral Students)
	
$112
	
$112
	
Books, Supplies, and Course Materials*
	
$2,008
	
$1,004
	
Personal/Miscellaneous Expenses
	
$4,100
	
$4,100
	
Transportation
	
$1,546
	
$1,546
	
Allowances in this chart are based on a student attending the online program at either a full-time or half-time enrollment status for 9 months of enrollment, typically the Fall and Spring semesters.
*The Books, Supplies, and Course Materials allowance for online undergraduate students will be factored in at a decreased rate, because their Inclusive Access charges are waived.
Costs of Attendance Allowance Definitions
Living Expenses (Food and Housing): An allowance for food and housing costs, as determined by the institution, to be incurred by the student attending the institution on at least a half-time basis, including:
A standard food allowance that provides the equivalent of three meals each day, regardless of whether a student chooses institutionally owned or operated food services (i.e., board or meal plans). Institutions must provide an allowance for purchasing food off campus for a student that does not elect institutionally owned or operated food services.
Housing allowances for students residing in institutionally owned or operated housing with or without dependents must be based on the average or median amount assessed to such residents for housing charges, whichever is greater.
Housing allowances for students living off-campus must include rent or other housing costs.
For dependent students living at home with parents, institutions must include a reasonable standard allowance for living expenses that are not zero.
For students living in housing on a military base or for which they receive a basic allowance under section 403(b) of title 37, United States Code, institutions must include a reasonable allowance for food on-campus or off-campus but cannot include housing costs
For all other students, institutions must include a reasonable allowance based on expenses incurred by such students.
Fees: Along with tuition, an amount normally assessed a student carrying the same academic workload, as determined by the institution.
Loan Fees: An allowance for the cost of any Federal student loan fee, origination fee, or insurance premium charged to the student or the parent of the student. The allowance may be actual or average costs, as appropriate; and may not include the cost associated with non-Federal loans.
Books, Course Materials, Supplies and Equipment: An allowance for books, course materials, and equipment, which must include all such costs required of all students in the same course of study, including a reasonable allowance for the rental or upfront purchase of a personal computer, as determined by the institution.
Personal/Miscellaneous Expenses: An allowance, as determined by the institution, for a student attending the institution on at least a half-time basis.
Special Program Tuition Rates: 2022-23
LUOA/EDGE	$549 per full-year course	
Willmington School of the Bible	$120 per credit hour	
Did You Know?
Parents who attend Liberty University Online may be eligible to receive a 10% tuition discount for their child to enroll with Liberty University Online Academy.** 
Additional Definitions
Undergraduate	Part-time rate if taking 11.99 hours or less
Full-time rate if taking 12 hours or more	
Graduate	Part-time rate if taking 8.99 hours or less
Full-time rate if taking 9 hours or more	
Postgraduate and Doctoral	Part-time rate if taking 5.99 hours or less
Full-time rate if taking 6 hours or more	
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity
Master’s Programs	Block rate: 9 to 15 credit hours (less than 9 or more than 15 credit hours: $395/credit hour)	
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity D.Min. and Ph.D. programs	Block rate: 7 to 15 credit hours (less than 7 or more than 15 credit hours: $395/credit hour)	
Liberty’s Online Program Fees
Application/re-application fee	$50 1-time fee (non-refundable)	
Technology fee*	$249 per semester (Starting Fall 2023 this fee will change to $299 per semester)	
Late Financial Check-In fee	$150	
Payment plan participation	$50 per semester	
Portfolio assessment fee	$100	
Degree Completion Application fee	$100 for degrees and $50 for certificates (automatically assessed by Student Financial Services near the time of the Degree/Certificate Completion Application, not degree conferral)	
Course Fees	View the course fees chart	
*Technology fee is waived for all active-duty, reserves, and National Guard service members who are meeting all other eligibility requirements. (Starting Fall 2023 this fee will no longer be waived for new military students)
**Discount only applicable to tuition for non-dual enrollment courses with Liberty University Online Academy (LUOA). Students must be new to LUOA and enrolled in full-time courses to be eligible. At least one parent must have completed a course with Liberty University Online (LUO) within the last 24 months to be eligible. This LUO Parent Discount is not stackable with other discounts. Contact LUOA for further details and to see if your family is eligible. 
Contact Student Financial Services"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/international/","Join the Liberty Family as an International Student
Are you looking for a high-quality education in a welcoming, Christian environment?
You can find it at Liberty University.
Here, we care about excellent academics, good quality of life, safety, and our Christian faith. Join more than 700 international students from over 70 countries on our beautiful campus in Central Virginia. You can choose from more than 200 undergraduate programs of study — including biomedical sciences, engineering, business, public health, aviation, and many others.
A Liberty education is designed to prepare you for success in today’s workplace. In many programs, you’ll learn directly on the equipment that industry professionals are using. And our focus on leadership and relational skills will help you learn to engage American culture — and other cultures — effectively.
Liberty’s global mindset and commitment to meaningful interactions between students are grounded in our Christian faith. We have a welcoming community of international students with regular events and meet-ups at Liberty University’s International Student Center. Each semester, we celebrate international students through Global Focus Week, where you’ll find opportunities to grow professionally and spiritually.
Did You Know?
At Liberty, you can participate in our Washington, D.C. internship program.
At Liberty, you can participate in our Washington, D.C. internship program.
Liberty is located only three and a half hours from Washington, D.C.
Our international admissions staff is dedicated to providing you the support services you need.
As a Christian community, everything we do is centered around our faith.
You will hear from nationally and internationally known speakers on a regular basis through Convocation.
Faculty members believe in mentoring their students, both personally and academically.
Cheer on Liberty’s men’s and women’s soccer, hockey, volleyball, basketball, and many other collegiate sports teams.
A variety of academic scholarships, including the honors program, may be available to you — for more information, just ask!
Our C. Daniel Kim International Student Center is a special place for international students to relax and connect with one another.
Liberty is given an A+ rating on Niche.com for campus safety.
Lynchburg has been ranked as one of the top 10 healthiest, happiest cities, according to a 2017 study by Gallup and Healthways.
Liberty University International Admissions Steps:
Complete your international application. This step includes filling out an application form and writing your admission essay.
Request your official high school or college transcripts to be sent in. These documents may need to be translated into English and will require a foreign credential evaluation.
Submit your Affidavit of Financial Support. A sponsor letter and bank document are required.
If your native language is not English, please send in your proof of English language proficiency. Examples include Duolingo, TOEFL, TOEFL Essentials, IELTS, PTE, or iTEP Academic Plus exams.
Submit a copy of the photo page of your passport.
Please note: This is a simplified overview of the process. Please contact an international admissions specialist for detailed information and to answer your questions. 
The Liberty University international admissions team is here for you.
As you are reviewing your admission process, please keep in mind that our International Admissions Specialists are here to assist you through every step of your journey to Liberty.
Testimonials
Coming to Liberty University has changed my life. I have a different mindset about the world now, knowing that God wants me to be His representative in my university, in my profession, and wherever I go. – Micael Melo, Brazil
Coming to Liberty University has changed my life. I have a different mindset about the world now, knowing that God wants me to be His representative in my university, in my profession, and wherever I go. – Micael Melo, Brazil
The faculty and staff [at Liberty] pour their whole hearts out just to support students and help them to have the best experience. – Vy Vu, Vietnam
Living in another country at the age of 17 was very interesting. God has always been with me, and He has surrounded me with amazing friends that I now consider my family. I realize that God’s love is what has brought me to this place. – Kike Caycedo, Colombia
Frequently Asked Questions
As you learn more about Liberty’s admissions process, you may have questions about specific steps. Our international admissions specialists are here to help! To get you started, here are some common questions and answers from Liberty University’s admissions office.
Does Liberty University offer transcript evaluation services?
How many international students does Liberty University have?
Is there a resource for international students on campus?
What is a foreign credential or an international transcript?
What is the best foreign transcript evaluation service?
Why do I need proof of English language competency?"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/undergraduate/transfer-students/","Admissions Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/admission-process/","Navigate our Online Program Admissions Process and Start Your Degree!
As you embark on your academic journey, the university admission process can seem overwhelming. In order to help you pursue an online college degree program from Liberty University, we have designed 5 steps to make it easy to navigate through the Liberty admission and enrollment process and begin your online degree as soon as possible!
Step 1 – Submit Your Admission Application
Step 2 – Submit Your Admission Documents
Step 3 – Start the Financial Aid Process
Step 4 – Enroll in Your First Courses
Step 5 – Complete Financial Check-In
Online Programs Admissions Contact Information
Admissions Office
Call: (833) 227-1038
Email:
Undergraduate: luoundergrad@liberty.edu
Graduate: luograd@liberty.edu
Admissions Verification (Documents)
Address: Liberty University Online Admissions Verification
1971 University Blvd.
Lynchburg, VA 24515
Fax: (888) 301-3577
E-mail: luoverify@liberty.edu"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/undergraduate/homeschool/","Our Homeschool Student College Admission Process
Are you excited to transition from being a homeschool student to a residential college student? We want to make this transition as smooth as possible for you.
Below you will find information about Liberty University’s admission requirements, including unique aspects of our homeschool college admission process.
Before reviewing Liberty University’s requirements for admission, check out these additional resources to find out what all Liberty has to offer:
Student Activities
On-Campus Clubs
Dorm Life
Athletics
Scholarship Opportunities
Every year, Liberty welcomes homeschoolers from around the world into its student body. Our college requirements for homeschoolers are the same as those for students attending public or private school. You’ll just need to follow some unique guidelines for submitting transcripts and other documentation.
As a regionally accredited university, Liberty is committed to offering a world-class education — and to helping students of all backgrounds thrive in college and beyond. If you’re looking to make the transition from homeschool to Liberty University, we can help you through the process. From scholarships to dual enrollment, we offer homeschoolers the same great opportunities and college experience as the rest of our students.
We are excited to have you join the Liberty family. Apply today and train to become a Champion for Christ in your workplace, your community, and the world.
Liberty University’s Application Requirements for Homeschoolers
When applying as a homeschooler, you’ll follow the same admission steps as students attending traditional high school. Additionally, Liberty has specific requirements for the documentation you need to submit as a homeschool student.
If you have any questions after reviewing the steps below, please contact an admissions counselor at (800) 543-5317 for more information about Liberty’s college admissions for homeschool students.
Liberty’s Homeschool Student Admission Requirements
Homeschool Addendum
Other Documentation
Frequently Asked Questions
Can homeschool students apply for financial aid?
Does Liberty University have a GPA requirement for homeschoolers?
What are Liberty University’s SAT requirements for homeschoolers?
Can homeschool students take dual enrollment classes at Liberty?
Does Liberty offer scholarships to homeschoolers?
Have Any Questions?
Admissions Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m.
Message and data rates may apply. For additional information, text HELP to 49596. You may opt-out at any time by sending STOP to 49596. Visit for Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/","Let’s Find Your Program
You are anything but a typical student — and Liberty is anything but a typical university.
Here you’ll meet students who know they can be and do anything. They celebrate uniqueness. They stand up for others. They put faith into practice and apply what they learn to real-world situations, all while preparing to thrive in a career. They are empowered — not just academically, but also personally — to drive change, and they inspire one another to be extraordinary.
Come see what it means to train as a Champion for Christ. Experience the Liberty difference for yourself and find endless possibilities — all in one place.
Liberty University has provided me with countless opportunities and experiences that have helped me grow, prosper, and further advance in my future goals and career! LU has provided an environment for me to be supported and encouraged throughout my walk with Christ, which has also created friendships that will last a lifetime!”
– Hailey Isenbarger
Liberty University has provided me with countless opportunities and experiences that have helped me grow, prosper, and further advance in my future goals and career! LU has provided an environment for me to be supported and encouraged throughout my walk with Christ, which has also created friendships that will last a lifetime!”
– Hailey Isenbarger
Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America.
96% of Liberty students receive financial aid
My time at Liberty has shaped me into the person I am today. The community is unlike any other, the atmosphere is uplifting, and people take the time to know you and walk through life with you.”
– Taylor Redd
24:1 student to teacher ratio
You should look for a school that helps facilitate your growth and provides an environment to establish the core values and mindsets needed to thrive in a global society. Personally, I think Liberty University is one of the best places for that.”
– Benjamin Moultrie Grant
Students from all 50 states and more than 70 countries
You will not find professors at any other school that are more loving and dedicated to their students. …They will love you and they will care for you, that’s why Liberty professors are the best.”
– Karl Nelson
Internship programs in Washington D.C. 
Convocation 2:33
College For A Weekend 0:30
What is Your Calling? 1:00
Liberty Quick Facts
Liberty offers 350+ residential degrees (undergraduate and graduate) through 15 colleges and schools
Liberty’s campus spans over 7,000 acres
Student-athletes compete in the FBS, the ASUN conference, and the Big East through 20 NCAA Division 1 sports
Visit Us
You have to see the Liberty difference to believe it.
Find out what it means to be a student at Liberty University by touring campus, meeting admissions staff, and hearing from department representatives at one of our daily visits or Experience LU day-long events.
Schedule a Visit >
College For A Weekend (CFAW)
Want a live demo of college life at Liberty?
At College For A Weekend, you can spend 3 days test-driving life as an LU student, going to classes, eating in the dining hall, exploring campus, and getting all of your college questions answered.
You’re anything but a typical student, so CFAW is anything but a typical college tour.
College For A Weekend (CFAW) >
News
Whether it’s the recap of a notable Convocation speaker, a university announcement, or the exciting achievements of our students, faculty and staff, or alumni, keep up with all of Liberty’s latest news.
News >
What does it mean to be a Christian college?
How quickly can I complete my degree?
What are the admission requirements for my program?
Do you accept international students?
Can residential students take online classes?"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/","Explore programs available for…
Ranked among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America and recognized by multiple institutions for academic quality, affordability, and accessibility
10 Days
Until Start Of Next Term.
50th Anniversary 2:11
Week in the Life 1:00
Start Planning For Your Future!
Estimate your Cost
$000
Cost Per Credit Hour iVisit the Tuition and Financing page for more information. 
Disclaimer: This calculator is a tool that provides a rough estimate of the total cost of tuition, and should not be relied upon to determine overall costs, as pricing may vary by program and tuition/fees are subject to change. Estimates are not final or binding, and do not include potential financial aid eligibility.
Associate Bachelor's Master's Doctorate Certificate
Program of InterestPlease Select a Desired Major
Expected Transfer Credits 
Provide additional aid amount you may receiveiAdd all aid (scholarships, grants, etc.) you plan to receive throughout your degree for an estimated total cost. 
Disclaimer: This calculator is a tool that provides a rough estimate of the total cost of tuition, and should not be relied upon to determine overall costs, as pricing may vary by program and tuition/fees are subject to change. Estimates are not final or binding, and do not include potential financial aid eligibility.
Programs for Nearly Every Field
Go from merely surviving in your current job to thriving in the career of your dreams.
Find Your Degree >
Enjoy Flexible Courses
Liberty’s online degrees are taught in a flexible virtual classroom environment, allowing students to complete assignments on their own schedules.
View Course Guides >
Backed by a Physical Campus
You can tailor your degree to match your area of study while studying at our state-of-the-art Virginia campus or globally online.
Take a Virtual Tour of Campus >
Military Support
Liberty University is dedicated to providing a world class educational experience to military students across the globe.
Let Us Serve You >
Top FAQs
Still have questions? Check out our full 
FAQs page for more answers.
What does it mean that you are a Christian college?
How quickly can I complete my degree?
How do online classes compare to traditional on-campus classes?
What are the admission requirements for my program?
Do you accept International students?
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/athletics/","Athletics
Liberty University Athletics
NCAA Sports
Visit the Liberty Flames site to learn more about Liberty University’s NCAA Division I program. Liberty’s NCAA Division I program has won over 190 NCAA Division I conference titles.
Men’s Sports
Women’s Sports
Join the Flames Club Today!
Let’s put the strongest teams possible on the field, court, track, course, and in the pool. Become a Flames Club member, and invest in the athletic performance of your favorite Liberty University teams today.
Join Flames Club
Club Sports
Liberty’s Club Sports program has teams that have participated in and won national tournaments and placed in regional events.
Men’s Teams
Women’s Teams
Both Men’s and Women’s Teams
Be Early. Be Loud. Wear Red.
Get ready for game day by purchasing Liberty apparel through the bookstore.
Buy Flames Merchandise
Liberty License Plates
Support scholarships for Virginia students by purchasing Liberty license plates.
Order Your License Plate
Intramural Sports
Intramurals are open to all students. These recreational leagues offer a variety of team and individual sports.
3 Point Shootout
Basketball
Beach Volleyball
Billiards
Broomball
Disc Golf
Dodgeball
Fantasy Football
Flag Football
4v4 Flag Football
Indoor Soccer
Kickball
Outdoor Soccer
Racquetball
Slam Dunk Contest
Softball
Table Tennis
Tennis
Ultimate Frisbee
Volleyball"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/parents/","Have Questions? We Have Answers.
Learn More About What We Offer Your Student: 
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
A Parent’s Perspective 
Hear why A&E’s Duck Dynasty, bestselling author, Liberty mom Korie Robertson and her family chose Liberty University.
Planning your college tour schedule? 
Download this “College Visit Quick Guide” to rate each school you visit and keep track of favorites! See how Liberty compares when you explore all we have to offer under the “Discover Liberty” tab above.
“We were so impressed by the state-of-the-art facilities and the pride and care that is taken in them. Remarkable. I could go on and on and on. There really is no other place like Liberty.” – Elizabeth M. prospective LU mom
Did You Know?
Our technical studies program allows students to take electives or add a minor in carpentry, welding, HVAC, electrical, or plumbing.
95% of Liberty students receive some sort of financial aid.
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility.
Our technical studies program allows students to take electives or add a minor in carpentry, welding, HVAC, electrical, or plumbing.
Liberty’s award-winning Food Court at Reber Thomas features more than 22 food stations.
Regular bus routes transport students on and off campus.
Residential students can also take online courses to maximize both time and money.
Every hour of the day, every day of the week, someone is praying for prayer requests submitted by students.
Liberty was ranked among the top 3 safest campuses in Virginia and in the top 10% of safest campuses in America for 2023 by Niche.com.
You can be a student, too! Many parents pursue online degrees through Liberty and graduate together with their children.
Liberty has a dedicated Parent and Family Connections office.
Liberty was ranked in the top 5 best dining halls in the country for the past 4 years by BestColleges.com.
Discounts for Your Family
Discounts may be available for families who have members attending across our campuses – residential, online, and the online academy. To find out what this may mean for you, contact Liberty University Online Academic Advising at (800) 424-9595. 
Before College at Liberty
During College at Liberty
After College at Liberty
We’re Here to Help
Your son or daughter is preparing for their first big transition into adulthood — college. You’ve walked with them through every major event in their lives, and this one will be no different.
So, we’re here to make the process as simple as possible.
Want to talk? Call our dedicated parent helpline at (855) 745-3568 to ask questions or talk with one of our admissions specialists about what’s next. There’s no need to go through this alone — we’re here to help!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/seminary","Your Choice: On Campus or Online
Study at the bachelor’s, master’s, or doctoral level.
Experience life on campus while studying residentially or enjoy the flexibility that comes with online classes. Either way, Liberty will help you pursue your passion for ministry.
With more than 90 areas of study, the John W. Rawlings School of Divinity lets you customize your degree so it matches your calling. Through our degree programs, you’ll also be able to gain real-world experience through internships in local churches and parachurch organizations all over America and the world.
Degree Programs
A State-Of-The-Art School
The 275-foot-tall Freedom Tower and the large, three-story building encircling its base is home to the John W. Rawlings School of Divinity, the world’s largest school for religious studies and ministerial training.
A Member of the Association of Theological Schools, the School of Divinity stands on a solid, biblically based foundation and a firm commitment to conservative evangelical theology.
Gain the skills you’ll need to engage today’s culture with the Gospel, and impact the world for God’s kingdom.
About Our School
Get Exceptional Training
Our renowned faculty brings years of research and publishing, ministry, cultural influence, and leadership to the classroom.
Courses are designed to cultivate authentic faith, Christlike character, and professional excellence.
Through our years of experience, you’ll get the sound, Bible-based teaching you need so you can graduate fully prepared for your ministry.
Divinity Faculty
About the Rawlings School of Divinity
Give to the Rawlings School of Divinity
Donate Now 
Rawlings Scriptorium Museum
Visit"
"https://www.liberty.edu/law","Be among the next generation of Christian lawyers who will make a difference in the courtroom, the political arena, and the world. 
What You Need from a Law School
At Liberty Law, you’ll receive the education and experiential training you’ll need to make a solid impact on society. Graduate “practice-ready” through our specialized practical skills program and customize your degree by choosing from 12 areas of study like Criminal Justice, Business Law, Family and Juvenile law, Constitutional Law, and International Law.
Request Information
Our School At a Glance



96.36% 
Ultimate Bar Passage Rate 
Class of 2020 



View More Facts 
Discover Our School
Latest Liberty Law News"
"https://www.liberty.edu/undergrad","432,958+
Community Service Hours
304+
Undergrad & Grad Programs
432,958+
Community Service Hours
304+
Undergrad & Grad Programs
432,958+
Community Service Hours
304+
Undergrad & Grad Programs
432,958+
Community Service Hours
304+
Undergrad & Grad Programs
The Liberty DNA
Liberty’s promise to you is an education that expertly brings knowledge and faith together. You’ll not only be challenged academically but also pushed spiritually through weekly worship gatherings and community engagement, local service projects, and global mission trips. You can become a Champion for Christ that changes the world with the Gospel.
Convocation
The largest weekly gathering of Christian students in North America cannot happen without a key ingredient: you. Experience life-changing messages from more than 80 nationally acclaimed speakers each year.
LU Send Now
You see the news and your heart breaks — you want to help, but how? Be part of LU Send NOW and respond as the hands and feet of Jesus by providing humanitarian, spiritual, and psychological aid amidst disaster and crisis.
Residence Hall Community
Experience quality on-campus living that not only provides safe and inviting housing options but also meets your need for community and personal development. On each hall, your peers live life alongside you to spur your holistic development. 
Convocation
The largest weekly gathering of Christian students in North America cannot happen without a key ingredient: you. Experience life-changing messages from more than 80 nationally acclaimed speakers each year.
Learn More 
Go Back 
Convocation
The largest weekly gathering of Christian students in North America cannot happen without a key ingredient: you. Experience life-changing messages from more than 80 nationally acclaimed speakers each year.
Learn More 
Go Back 
LU Send Now
You see the news and your heart breaks — you want to help, but how? Be part of LU Send NOW and respond as the hands and feet of Jesus by providing humanitarian, spiritual, and psychological aid amidst disaster and crisis.
Learn More 
Go Back 
Residence Hall Community
Experience quality on-campus living that not only provides safe and inviting housing options but also meets your need for community and personal development. On each hall, your peers live life alongside you to spur your holistic development. 
Learn More 
Go Back 
World Class Experience — Affordable Price
At Liberty, we don’t stop working to develop new financial solutions for families — like refusing to raise tuition costs for 5 years, so you can enjoy the same amazing value when you start school in Fall 2023. A full list of scholarships and eligibility requirements can be found on Liberty University’s Financial Aid website. For resident undergraduate students only. View information on graduate financial aid here. 
Middle America Scholarship
Liberty Academic Scholarship
Visit Our Central Virginia Campus
Have you visited Liberty yet? We can’t wait to have you. Watch a robot fetch your books at the Jerry Falwell Library, cheer on the winning touchdown at Williams Stadium, break a sweat at the fitness center, and gaze at the stars at the astronomical observatory.
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Located directly behind Arthur S. DeMoss Hall, the Montview Student Union is a 4-story, 168,000-square-foot structure that includes a lounge overlooking the Academic Commons, retail dining venues, an art gallery, a ballroom, and a bowling alley. The building also has space for academics, meetings, and offices. 
The Liberty Baseball Stadium features the latest turf playing surface, as well as full-length, major league-style dugouts, a fully-equipped media area, two suites, a club room, and a spectator picnic area. 
The Center for Medical and Health Sciences (CMHS) is a state-of-the-art modern learning facility for Liberty University's College of Osteopathic Medicine (LUCOM) and School of Health Sciences. Sitting on Liberty Mountain, the 140,000 square-foot, four-story facility offers breathtaking views of the valley and the Blue Ridge Mountains to the north and west. 
The Center for Music and the Worship Arts features 124 Steinway pianos and 43 teaching studios complete with piano, songwriting, and music computer labs. Additionally, the center includes a 1,600-seat concert hall. 
The Center for Natural Sciences houses classrooms, an auditorium, and more than 30 laboratories designed for hands-on learning, including an advanced anatomy lab and a cell culture lab. The facility has more than $2 million in equipment, including a GC mass spectrometer and a gene sequencer. 
As the primary academic building on campus, Arthur S. DeMoss Hall spans 500,000 square feet over four floors and houses computer labs, classrooms and student resource centers, and a rooftop terrace. 
Jerry Falwell Library houses an array of study spaces including six learning commons, one technology commons, and 30 group-study rooms. Multiple terraces and balconies provide additional space to relax, and several dining options are available. Taking advantage of the latest technology, the ASRS, a robotic retrieval system, houses the majority of the library’s collections in a state-of-the-art automated on-site retrieval system. 
The 275-foot-tall Freedom Tower, home of the John W. Rawlings School of Divinity, the nation’s largest center for religious studies and ministerial training, includes classrooms and offices, a conference room, a homiletics lab, and an interactive classroom, as well as observation spaces to take in the spectacular views of campus. 
The LaHaye Ice Center is home to Liberty men's and women's hockey teams, as well as the synchronized skating and figure skating teams. Recently renovated, the ice center seats 4,000 fans and includes 10 box suites. 
Whichever way you like to break a sweat, you can do it here! The recreation center has weight rooms, cardio lofts, private classrooms, an indoor track, pools, a rock wall, soccer fields, and basketball courts. 
The Reber-Thomas Dining Center (Liberty’s dining hall) is a two-story, 120,000-square-foot all-you-care-to-eat buffet that boasts a seating capacity of more than 2,700. It provides breakfast, lunch, and dinner and offers over 20 unique stations to choose from. 
The Residential Commons are comprised of three residence halls. The rooms feature a private bath, and every floor provides laundry facilities and a common lounge. Additional residential facilities are also planned for the site. 
The three-story structure serves as a home base for the School of Business, which includes 152 programs from the certificate to the doctoral level, as well as centers of excellence focused on entrepreneurship, financial literacy, cybersecurity, and stock trading. On the first floor, a stock trading simulation room, operating in partnership with Truist, features an LED stock ticker that wraps around the top of the room and streams the latest market activity from Wall Street. 
The Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre offers students the opportunity to ski, snowboard, and tube year-round with its cutting-edge terrain technology. 
Tower Theater is home to Liberty’s Department of Theatre Arts as well as the professional theatre company, Alluvion Stage Company. Tower Theater features a Broadway-style fly tower and professional rigging system and has over 12,000 square feet of backstage and support area. 
This auditorium’s 10,000 seats are filled by students at Convocation and Campus Community, concert-goers, and athletic event attendees. 
The stadium’s 25,000 seats host the fans of our FBS conference football team. Williams Stadium also boasts a 110-foot viewing tower and houses the Football Operations Center, containing locker rooms, coaches’ offices, equipment, and weight rooms, and a training facility. 
The Admission Process
Apply Now, Pay Later
Start the enrollment process by applying online now — the application takes about 10 minutes. Your application fee isn’t due until you enroll!
Get Accepted
Once you’ve submitted all your admission documents, you’ll be updated on the status of your application through text and email. You can also keep track on your Student Checklist.
Act Early
After you apply, submit your Enrollment Deposit to earn extra scholarship awards, which decrease over time.
Contact one of our Admissions Counselors for more information by calling (888) 270-6316.
Hear from Liberty Students — Past and Present
Former SGA President Derek R.
“The whole school and the administration have their mindset on heaven — the Holy Spirit is so active on campus.” 
Former SGA Vice President Esther L.
“It was knowing that I could be vulnerable about where I was from or what I was coming from or going through with people that were here and cared was encouraging and helped me with the transition.”
David H.
“Spiritually, I have seen the most growth in my life. …The spiritual atmosphere of the campus here at Liberty is unreal.”
Queenstar B.
“They [professors] see each student as an individual who has the potential to truly impact the world for God’s Namesake.”
Sarah B.
“Here there are authentic people that have really embodied how the Lord cares for each of us.”
Joseph H.
“Once I made it on campus — just the overwhelming amount of love that I received from the student body, the people on my hall, and my RAs just blew me away.”"
"https://www.liberty.edu/alumni/","Alumni news and events
February 16, 2023
June 9, 2022
August 1, 2023
July 10, 2023
June 9, 2023
June 9, 2023
Inspire the Future: Give Back
Alumni Benefits
Check out all of the benefits you receive as a Liberty Alum. 
Benefits
Reconnect with Friends
Class Notes
Come share your career achievements, marriages, births, and other lives events! We want to celebrate with you and your families, so please share those with us!
View Class Notes
Alumni Identification Card
Represent your Flames pride and enjoy Alumni benefits! Your card provides great discounts both on campus and off.
Get Your Alumni ID Card
Alumni Association Scholarship Fund
Support the next generation of Champions for Christ! Alumni-funded scholarships are awarded each year to eligible students in financial need. 
Give Today"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/graduate/","You’ve already earned a college degree — but you want to go further.
Maybe it’s medical school. Maybe it’s law school. Maybe it’s your MBA, MFA, or MPH.
However you want to become more competitive in the job market, Liberty University can help you reach your goals. With over 100 unique residential graduate degrees, The Graduate School at Liberty University can provide the support you need to become an expert in your field — and a valued contributor to the future of your profession.
Here you’ll study under world-class faculty in a distinctly Christian university. Take advantage of big-school resources, facilities, and research opportunities while enjoying smaller class sizes and personalized attention from faculty.
The Graduate School at Liberty University awards graduate certificates and master’s, postgraduate, and doctoral degrees.
Each degree program maintains its own set of admission requirements, so refer to your individual degree page for details.
Liberty’s Research Week is an annual opportunity for both undergraduate and graduate students to share their research with their peers, faculty, and the public.
Ready to go further with Liberty?
Apply NowRequest Info
Looking for graduate scholarship opportunities?
Consider our Graduate Student Assistant (GSA) program. GSA’s are master’s and doctoral-level students who serve in academic support roles across various university departments.
Learn more about becoming a GSA >
The Commuter Student Experience
Get the perks of a 7,000-acre college campus without living in a dorm room. Liberty’s commuter students enjoy:
Their own spacious commuter lounge — complete with charging stations, free lockers, a coffee bar, kitchen, and a collaborative meeting room.
LU Commuter Community Groups. Led by Community Shepherds and designed to give commuters spiritual connectivity similar to the residential student experience, these groups are centered around Campus Community and are set up as either male, female, or co-ed.
The Commuter Student Association. This student-led group offers members opportunities to serve and attend fun events, engage in local service activities, participate in leadership training, and connect with other off-campus students in a warm and welcoming environment.
Dining plans that provide convenient and affordable options for taking advantage of Liberty’s many dining locations.
Visiting the Graduate School at Liberty
Liberty University is located in the Blue Ridge Mountains in historic Lynchburg, Va. As a thriving community, Lynchburg offers countless opportunities for social, professional, and spiritual development.
We have two graduate student visiting options. Find the one that best fits you and come see why Liberty is a great choice:
Graduate Campus Tour
Graduate School Preview Day
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Frequently Asked Questions
While reviewing Liberty University’s admissions process, you may have questions about how our programs work or how to meet specific masters requirements. Below are several common questions and answers about Liberty’s graduate programs and degree requirements.
Can you get two masters degrees at the same time?
Can you switch masters programs after being accepted?
Does Liberty offer no-GRE masters programs?
Do you need a bachelors to get a masters degree?
How do you get a masters degree?
How many masters can you apply for?
What do you need to apply for a masters degree?"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online-academy/","Explore Our Programs
Affordable, Flexible, and Bible-Based Education for All Grade Levels
Elementary School
(K-5th Grade)
Give your student a solid foundation to build on
Middle School
(6th-8th Grade)
Prepare your student for high school and beyond
High School
(9th-12th Grade)
Give your student confidence for college or a future career
Dual Enrollment
(11th-12th Grade)
Get ahead by earning college credit while in high school
“That flexibility of being able to do school online and travel with us when she wanted to travel was just a really great blessing.”
Willie and Korie Robertson
How It Works
Online Education Doesn’t Have to Be Intimidating
We understand that our families need answers to 2 important questions: What do our students learn? and How does LUOA work? In addition to our easy-to-use curriculum, you and your student have access to a full team of support to help whenever you need it.
How It Works
“Being a student at LUOA gave me a lot of freedom to make my own schedule, which I really loved. I was able to go at my own pace, and therefore spend my extra time pursuing things that I truly enjoyed.”
Rolling Enrollment
Choose Any Time of Year to Start School
Enroll your student at any point with weekly enrollment. LUOA courses are offered in both full-year and half-year formats.
“When I was going through a hard time, my advisors were willing to work with me on assignments, and prayed for me when I was struggling.”
Bethany Adams '16
Flexible and Affordable
We Believe a World-Class Education Should Come at a Reasonable Price
Competitive Tuition
No matter what grade level your student is in, each course is billed at $549 for a full-year course. Similarly, we offer our college courses at the same rate for a 3-credit course.
Flexible Payment Plans
While you can choose to pay one lump sum, we also offer flexible payment plans that allow your student to access LUOA’s courses for a low monthly rate.
Generous Discounts
We offer a 10% discount for families who enroll a third student and any student after as well as discounts for military, missionary, pastoral families, and emergency response personnel.
Frequently Asked Questions
Still have questions? Check out our full FAQs page for more answers.
Ready to Set Your Student Up for a Future of Success?"
"https://www.liberty.edu/lucom","Advance health and wellness holistically by treating body, mind, and spirit with your DO degree from LUCOM at Liberty University.
Distinctively Christian. Distinctively World Class.
Student-doctors at Liberty University’s College of Osteopathic Medicine (LUCOM) learn early on that a DO degree is key to a fulfilling medical career.
Your education from LUCOM combines state-of-the-art facilities with diverse research opportunities. And you’ll learn alongside experienced faculty who are grounded in their Christian faith. Here, you’ll fulfill your passion for serving others while preparing to specialize in your chosen area of medicine.
And with a 100% match ratio (Class of 2022) for post-graduate residency training, you can confidently pursue your DO degree knowing LUCOM not only prepares you to serve – it equips you for success.
Request Information
Ready to Take Your Place at LUCOM?
Latest Liberty LUCOM News"
"https://www.liberty.edu/wilmingtonschoolofthebible","Grow in Your Faith by Pursuing a Diploma through the Willmington School of the Bible
The Willmington School of the Bible (WSB) is an online diploma designed for students who desire a deeper understanding of the Bible but do not wish to complete a degree program.
As an institutional diploma program, the Willmington School of the Bible provides a focused selection of Bible study, Christian ministry, church history, and theology courses so that you can focus on deepening your faith and knowledge of Scripture.
By earning a diploma from a nonprofit university whose online programs are widely recognized for academic quality, affordability, and accessibility, you will be set apart from others in your field. Our Willmington School of the Bible online program is well suited for lay ministers, pastors, Christian leaders, and those interested in a deeper study of the Bible for personal growth.
Can I Transfer Credits I Have Earned with my WSB Diploma into a Bachelor’s Degree?
If you choose to pursue a Bachelor of Science in Religion at a later time, all 60 credit hours earned in the WSB program may be transferred as a mix of foundational biblical studies and electives. This means you would only have around 60 additional credit hours of accredited online course content to complete to earn your bachelor’s degree. Transfer credit would best fit into a Bachelor of Science in Religion but can be used in any of Liberty’s undergraduate religion degrees. Undergraduate credit from other programs cannot be applied to your Willmington School of the Bible program.
If you would like to transfer any credits you’ve earned in the WSB diploma, please send an email to the online transcript evaluation team at undergradtransfer@liberty.edu with this request. Your transcript will be evaluated, and the appropriate credit will be posted in our system.
To begin your admission into Liberty University’s online programs or to get answers to any questions you may have, please contact an admissions counselor at (800) 424-9595.
Additional Program Information
Download and review the Graduate of Theology (WSB) Diploma Completion Plan.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Admission Requirements
Course Guides
Transfer Credit"
"https://www.liberty.edu/militaryaffairsredirect","Liberty University is dedicated to serving those who have served in the U.S. Armed Forces to ensure that you as a service member, veteran, or military dependent are given the most accurate and up-to-date information. Whether you are a first-time military student at Liberty University or a seasoned veteran at taking courses, our military homepage has information for everyone.
Military and Veteran Student Resources
Tuition Assistance
Check out our Tuition Assistance webpage to learn more about the processes for requesting and using Military Tuition Assistance.
Tuition Assistance
Support
Contact a Military Benefits Representative by phone, email, chat, or by visiting one of our locations on campus. We look forward to serving you!
Contact Us
Events
Our office plans events for our military student population. We hope to see all current service members, veterans, and military spouses at an upcoming event!
Events Webpage
Recognized by multiple institutions for academic quality, affordability, and accessibility.
Military Affairs Facebook Page Military Affairs Instagram Page
More Resources
Programs and Partnerships
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government Web site at https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/flamesbasketballwomen","Skip to main content
Men's Sports
Baseball
Basketball
Cross Country
Football
Golf
Soccer
Tennis
Track & Field
Women's Sports
Basketball
Cross Country
Field Hockey
Lacrosse
Soccer
Softball
Swimming & Diving
Tennis
Track & Field
Volleyball
Purchase Tickets
Football
Men's Basketball
Women's Basketball
Baseball
Buy Now
Group Tickets
Ticket Information
Main Page
Digital Tickets
SeatGeek: Buy or Sell Football Tickets
Flames Club
Flames Kids Club
Liberty Flames Game Day Central
Free Admission - Regular Season
Field Hockey
Lacrosse
Indoor Track & Field
Outdoor Track & Field
Men's Soccer
Women's Soccer
Softball
Volleyball 
Game Day
Facilities
Directions
LUnatics
Flames Club
Donate to Athletics
Flames Kids Club
Flames Exchange
LFSN Radio Network
Flames Central
Liberty Flames Podcast
Facilities
Student Resources
Athletics Compliance
Prospective Student Athletes
Cheerleading
Walk-on Tryout Information
About Liberty
Athletics Facilities
Staff
Teams Camps
Visit Liberty
Visiting Campus
Directions
Administration
Academic Affairs for Athletics
Athletics Compliance
NIL/Soar Initiative
Flames Performance Health
Staff Directory
Strategic Communications
Athletics Department Policy Manual
Students
Cheerleading
LUnatics
Sparky
Walk-on Tryout Information
Visitors
Directions
Facilities
Liberty University
Host Your Event
Corporate Sponsors
FAQ
History
Athletics Hall of Fame
Conference Team Championships
Liberty Flames Letterwinners
National Championships
Rock Royer/Mac Rivera Award
Shop"
"https://www.liberty.edu/flamesfootballpage","Skip to main content
Men's Sports
Baseball
Basketball
Cross Country
Football
Golf
Soccer
Tennis
Track & Field
Women's Sports
Basketball
Cross Country
Field Hockey
Lacrosse
Soccer
Softball
Swimming & Diving
Tennis
Track & Field
Volleyball
Purchase Tickets
Football
Men's Basketball
Women's Basketball
Baseball
Buy Now
Group Tickets
Ticket Information
Main Page
Digital Tickets
SeatGeek: Buy or Sell Football Tickets
Flames Club
Flames Kids Club
Liberty Flames Game Day Central
Free Admission - Regular Season
Field Hockey
Lacrosse
Indoor Track & Field
Outdoor Track & Field
Men's Soccer
Women's Soccer
Softball
Volleyball 
Game Day
Facilities
Directions
LUnatics
Flames Club
Donate to Athletics
Flames Kids Club
Flames Exchange
LFSN Radio Network
Flames Central
Liberty Flames Podcast
Facilities
Student Resources
Athletics Compliance
Prospective Student Athletes
Cheerleading
Walk-on Tryout Information
About Liberty
Athletics Facilities
Staff
Teams Camps
Visit Liberty
Visiting Campus
Directions
Administration
Academic Affairs for Athletics
Athletics Compliance
NIL/Soar Initiative
Flames Performance Health
Staff Directory
Strategic Communications
Athletics Department Policy Manual
Students
Cheerleading
LUnatics
Sparky
Walk-on Tryout Information
Visitors
Directions
Facilities
Liberty University
Host Your Event
Corporate Sponsors
FAQ
History
Athletics Hall of Fame
Conference Team Championships
Liberty Flames Letterwinners
National Championships
Rock Royer/Mac Rivera Award
Shop"
"https://www.liberty.edu/flamesbasketballmen","Skip to main content
Men's Sports
Baseball
Basketball
Cross Country
Football
Golf
Soccer
Tennis
Track & Field
Women's Sports
Basketball
Cross Country
Field Hockey
Lacrosse
Soccer
Softball
Swimming & Diving
Tennis
Track & Field
Volleyball
Purchase Tickets
Football
Men's Basketball
Women's Basketball
Baseball
Buy Now
Group Tickets
Ticket Information
Main Page
Digital Tickets
SeatGeek: Buy or Sell Football Tickets
Flames Club
Flames Kids Club
Liberty Flames Game Day Central
Free Admission - Regular Season
Field Hockey
Lacrosse
Indoor Track & Field
Outdoor Track & Field
Men's Soccer
Women's Soccer
Softball
Volleyball 
Game Day
Facilities
Directions
LUnatics
Flames Club
Donate to Athletics
Flames Kids Club
Flames Exchange
LFSN Radio Network
Flames Central
Liberty Flames Podcast
Facilities
Student Resources
Athletics Compliance
Prospective Student Athletes
Cheerleading
Walk-on Tryout Information
About Liberty
Athletics Facilities
Staff
Teams Camps
Visit Liberty
Visiting Campus
Directions
Administration
Academic Affairs for Athletics
Athletics Compliance
NIL/Soar Initiative
Flames Performance Health
Staff Directory
Strategic Communications
Athletics Department Policy Manual
Students
Cheerleading
LUnatics
Sparky
Walk-on Tryout Information
Visitors
Directions
Facilities
Liberty University
Host Your Event
Corporate Sponsors
FAQ
History
Athletics Hall of Fame
Conference Team Championships
Liberty Flames Letterwinners
National Championships
Rock Royer/Mac Rivera Award
Shop"
"https://www.liberty.edu/flames","Gameday 
Countdown To Game 
Liberty University 
1-0 (0-0)
vs.
New Mexico State University 
1-1 (0-0)
Saturday, September 09 
6:00 PM ET 
ESPN+ 
Lynchburg, Va."
"https://www.liberty.edu/campusrec/intramural-sports/","Intramural Sports
Register Here
Intramural Sports are organized recreational sports leagues that allow students at Liberty to participate in a variety of team and individual sports. Liberty offers over 20 different sports in various leagues and tournaments throughout the year. We exist to offer opportunities for health and exercise, social interaction, stress reduction, sportsmanship, teamwork, and healthy competition."
"https://www.liberty.edu/campusrec","Campus Recreation
Campus Recreation proudly serves the Liberty University community with a wide variety of programs and facilities. With recreation professionals in various fields, our staff passionately lends their expertise to help you maintain a healthy lifestyle and comes alongside you to help round out your college life with experiences outside of the classroom.
Campus Recreation can help you get plugged into campus life. We are here to help you connect socially, challenge you physically, and provide educational opportunities. So whether you are looking for a place to workout, a chance to join a team, or some time in the great outdoors, we have something for you."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/cfaw/","Join Us at Liberty University
Choosing a college is a big decision — one that you won’t make without doing your research, talking to people you trust, and visiting the campuses you’re considering. Many schools fit their university experience into a short presentation, tour, and Q&A. 
At Liberty University’s College For A Weekend (CFAW), you can spend three days test-driving life as an LU student, exploring our state-of-the-art campus, and getting all your college questions answered. You’re anything but a typical student, so CFAW is anything but a typical college tour. Design your perfect college visit at Liberty University. Explore endless possibilities — all in one place.
What Can You Do at CFAW?
Connect with other CFAW students.
Attend college classes with professors who have spent years working in their fields.
Enjoy our on-campus activities, such as skiing at the Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre, attending Convocation, and so much more!
Who Can Attend CFAW?
High school juniors, seniors, transfer students, and their families are welcome to join us at all four CFAW events* each year. High school sophomores are eligible to join CFAW for spring events only.
*Limited to attending one event per academic year (August-May).
Want to Bring a Group of Students to CFAW? 
Create and manage your CFAW account for all students in your group. Group accounts provide you with access to manage student registrations and payments. Please contact cfawgroups@liberty.edu for assistance.
How to Register
Register online through our CFAW portal, or call the Office of Admissions at (800) 543-5317 to register over the phone and pay your registration fee. 
Upcoming CFAW Events
Sept. 21-23, 2023
Nov. 9-11, 2023
Feb. 22-24, 2024
April 4-6, 2024 
How Much Does CFAW Cost?
For just $50, you get all your meals and access to awesome campus activities like athletic games and Student Connect events*! This fee doesn’t cover concert tickets, admission to Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre, or bowling rentals.
Payment can be made online or by phone at the time of registration and is non-refundable.
*Some exclusions apply.
CFAW Participation Form
In order to check in and participate in the events and activities at CFAW, you will need a completed Participation Form uploaded to your CFAW account. Having an approved form on file prior to your arrival ensures a smooth check-in process and will allow you more time to enjoy the weekend activities! To begin, follow the steps below:
Step 1: Download or electronically sign the CFAW Participation Form. Students under the age of 18 must also have a parent or guardian signature on the form, or it will be rejected, and a new form will be required.
Step 2: Log into your CFAW Account, navigate to your active registration, and select “Upload Your Participation Form.” Once received, our team will review the form in a timely manner.
Once your form is approved, you will be one step closer to a great weekend exploring Liberty University!
What Are Your Next Steps for CFAW?
Now that you have registered for CFAW, what is next?
We have tried to make it as simple as possible by outlining your planning needs and also providing a schedule of some of the many events you can experience while at CFAW.
Need other questions answered? We have a list of frequently asked questions to help you out."
"https://www.liberty.edu/campusrec/student-activities/concerts/","Concerts
All tickets are non-refundable. Please contact (434) 582-SEAT for any ticket-related issues.
Purchase tickets here:
Liberty Public
Concerts
Tauren Wells
Sept 22
8:00 p.m.
Vines Center
Student Tickets $10
GA Tickets $15
Floor Tickets $30
Students must log in to receive discount.
Tickets
Listen to Tauren Wells!
Spotify
Ft. Joshua Leventhal
Listen to Joshua Leventhal!
Spotify
Allie Paige
Nov 10
8:00 p.m.
LaHaye Event Space
Ft. Hannah Cheshire
Student Tickets $10
Students must log in to receive discount.
Tickets
Listen to Allie Paige!
Spotify
Event Information
Venue Guidelines
For safety precautions LU Police Department will be enforcing the following security regulations at concerts."
"https://www.liberty.edu/onlinestudentlife","Connecting You With Your Online Community
As an online student, we know life can be challenging as you balance work and home with your studies. Because of this, Online Life is here to help as you work towards your goals.
We offer what you need to succeed as an online student through community-building resources, personal development opportunities, student life events, and more.
We’ve even started our very own OnLife Podcast just for you! Get encouraged and equipped as you tune into each episode.
Build Community and Challenge Yourself
Community Resources
Find community and build your support system while working towards your education goals.
Community Resources
Personal Development Resources
Cultivate skills beyond your degree. Browse our resources and add them to your educational journey.
Personal Development
Student Communities
Connect with students around the globe through this unique online opportunity.
Join a Community
Student Life Events
Change it up and attend our on-campus events open to online students.
Find an event
Instagram"
"https://www.liberty.edu/homecomingredirect","Home / Homecoming
Homecoming
November 3-4
Register Now!
Purchase Tickets
Digital Booklet
First 500 groups to register receive a limited edition Homecoming travel mug
Baby onesies, clear bag totes, and t-shirts will be available on a first come, first served basis at Check-In 
Check-In Information
November 3-4
LaHaye Event Space
15 minute parking available in the Tilley Lot 
Fri: 9 a.m. – 7 p.m.
Sat: 9 a.m. – 12:30 p.m.
Guests must check in to receive their badge for access to facilities and various events throughout the weekend. Only one person per group must be present to check in.
You must present a photo ID at Check-In. You may only check in yourself and those you registered for.
Review our FAQ’s for more details about Check-In"
"https://www.liberty.edu/club-sports/","Skip to main content
Scoreboard
Dance
vs Liberty University Homecoming
Dance
vs Brigham Young University
Dance
vs Virginia Tech
Dance
vs New Mexico State University
Dance
vs Coffeehouse
Dance
vs University of Virginia
Dance
vs Concordia University Irvine
Dance
vs Dance Clinic & Tryouts
Cycling
at Mountain Bike Race
Cycling
at Mountain Bike Race
Racquetball
vs Tryouts
Ski & Snowboard
vs Tryouts
Beach Volleyball
vs AVCA Men's Alliance Fall Event
Men's D3 Hockey
at Potomac Patriots
Beach Volleyball
vs AVCA Men's Alliance Fall Event
Cycling
at Appalachian State University
Triathlon
at Patriots Triathlon
Beach Volleyball
vs AVCA Men's Alliance Fall Event
Cycling
at Appalachian State University
Ski & Snowboard
vs Tryouts
Stories
Countdown
vs
Men's D1 Hockey
vsNorth Carolina State University
Liberty University Club Sports Videos
Slideshow Grid"
"https://www.liberty.edu/lahaye-ice-center/","The LaHaye Ice Center opened in January 2006 due to funds generously donated by Drs. Tim (1926-2016) and Beverly LaHaye. Friends and supporters of Liberty University for years, the LaHayes also donated the LaHaye Student Union located across from the LaHaye Ice Center on the campus of Liberty University. The LaHaye Ice Center services the student body of Liberty University and the greater Lynchburg area.
There are many ways to enjoy
the LaHaye Ice Center
Skating
Learn to Skate at Liberty University is designed to serve the needs of both recreational and competitive skaters. The classes keep skaters enthusiastic about learning from the time they begin lessons until the time they reach their goals!
Hockey
Join a crowd of up to 3,000 at a Liberty University ACHA Division I Men’s Hockey game, or cheer on our Division I Women’s Hockey, Division II Men’s Hockey, Division III Men’s Hockey, or Division II Women’s Hockey teams.
Public Events
Although the LaHaye Ice Center is centrally located on the campus of Liberty University, it is utilized greatly by the community. Check out our Calendar for upcoming public events, including public skating, open hockey, freestyle, learn to skate programs, and summer camps.
There are many ways to enjoy
the LaHaye Ice Center
Skating
Learn to Skate at Liberty University is designed to serve the needs of both recreational and competitive skaters. The classes keep skaters enthusiastic about learning from the time they begin lessons until the time they reach their goals!
Hockey
Public Events
Although the LaHaye Ice Center is centrally located on the campus of Liberty University, it is utilized greatly by the community. Check out our Calendar for upcoming public events, including public skating, open hockey, freestyle, learn to skate programs, and summer camps.
Upcoming Events
Our Partners"
"https://www.liberty.edu/flamespass/","Helping You Access Campus and Other Services
Our department issues the University’s official identification card, the Flames Pass, and provides other services for students, faculty, and staff.
Fall 2023 Announcements
On and off-campus spending"
"https://www.liberty.edu/casas/parents/","Helping Parents Stay Connected
Parent and Family Connections is here to provide you with everything you need to know as a Liberty parent. From important dates to academic policies to campus resources, we want to help you get the information you need to support your son or daughter as a Liberty student.
Announcements
Making travel plans this fall? Use the Registrar’s 2023-2024 Academic Calendar (PDF). Here are some dates to notice and what they mean.
Fall Break is Thursday and Friday, Oct. 12-13.
Thanksgiving Break begins after your student’s last class on Friday, Nov. 17.
Final Exams are Dec. 7-12. Here is the Final Exam Schedule. Note: On Dec. 13, Residence Halls close at noon; the Dining Hall closes after lunch.
CASAS Professional Advisors are meeting with students this month for advising holds and degree program questions.
Looking ahead a month! Course registration schedules for the spring semester begins Oct. 16.
Monthly Newsletter is published! Read the newest issue!
As the semester progresses, expect there to be a spiritual battle. Be wary, armor up! 
Your student is answering the Lord’s call for their lives. As they are obedient to Him, there is an enemy that wages war against them, an enemy that wages war against your family succeeding. Partner with your students through prayer against discouragement, confusion, disbelief, anxiety, and despair. (Ephesians 6:10-18).
For Your First Year and Praying For Your Student bring the academic calendar and common high points and low points to your attention to equip your prayers.
College parenting has its high points and low points, too! In Full Hope of an Answer and When You and Your Student Disagree may be exactly what you need this month. 
Resources
Family Weekend
Family Weekend
We believe that family members and guardians are a valuable part of their students’ lives. The PFC office regularly promotes opportunities for LU Family to meet and enjoy the campus together from your first New Parent & Family Session to Liberty Family Weekend.
Monthly Newsletter
Monthly Newsletter
Edify, Encourage, and Equip is the mantra in our office when writing the monthly newsletters. Connect to campus life, learn about activities that may impact your student’s success, get to know the university’s departments, and pray through the academic year.
Connect with Us
Call us at (434) 582-2339
Email us at LUFamily@liberty.edu
“Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it.” — Proverbs 22:6
“Trust in the Lord with all your heart and lean not unto your own understanding; in all your ways acknowledge Him and He will direct your paths.” — Proverbs 3:5-6
“Rejoice always, pray without ceasing, in everything give thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus for you. – 1 Thessalonians 5:16-18"
"https://www.liberty.edu/commuter-student-life/","Welcome to Your Commuter Experience
Commuter Life at Liberty isn’t just about getting to and from campus—it’s a chance to immerse yourself in an uplifting community that strengthens your character, bolsters your leadership abilities, and deepens your faith.
For our undergraduate commuter students, Commuter Life can help you connect and grow while you explore and establish lasting bonds within Liberty and the local Lynchburg community.
Whether you’re navigating campus for the first time or returning for another enriching year, you’re not alone. You belong here. As a commuter, you’re an integral part of our Liberty community, and we’re excited to come alongside you to ensure an experience worth celebrating!
Visit Commuter Life
You can find us at our spaces located in Green Hall–relax between classes or grab a free cup of coffee in the Commuter Lounge (GH 1875) or visit the Commuter Resource Center (GH 1832), the home of our Commuter Food Pantry and the place to learn about a range of resources available to you.
Director of Commuter Life
Sheldon Farrington
First-Year Commuter Retreat
Kickstart your college career on August 19, 2023 with a free and unforgettable retreat experience.
Learn More
Commuter Life
Events
Connect, have fun, and win prize giveaways with our line-up of commuter-exclusive events.
Commuter Life Events
Personal
Development
Your Journey, Your Growth: fuel your future with Commuter Life’s personal development series.
Explore Workshops
Serve with the Commuter Experience Team (CSER
As a Commuter Experience Team CSER volunteer, you will play a key role in setting up and running some of our most popular events, including:
Student Life Tailgates
Introvert Happy Hours
Commuter Lounge Pop-up Events
Holiday Celebrations
Commuter Appreciate Week Programs
Each event provides a unique opportunity to connect with fellow students, serve their needs, and create unforgettable experiences for commuter students. Want to serve with us? Email commuters@liberty.edu to see if there are spots on the Commuter Experience Team.
Follow Us on Instagram"
"https://www.liberty.edu/international-student-center/","Additional Navigation
Stay Up-To-Date on COVID-19
Get COVID-19: International Student Center Updates
An International Community at Liberty
At the C. Daniel Kim International Student Center (ISC), we’ll help you adjust to life at Liberty and in the U.S. We support our international students and promote international culture through on-campus workshops and cultural events. Whether you need help with federal regulations or want to connect with other students, the International Student Center will help you feel at home. For more information on admissions, see our International Student Admissions page.
Life at Liberty
Transcripts & Letters of Enrollment
Housing
Summer Classes & Housing
Financial Facts
Champion Chronicles
Health Insurance
Scholarships
Connections
Life in the U.S.
Passport & Driver’s License
Applying for a new degree
Resources for living in the U.S.
Emergency Preparedness
Faculty and Staff Resources
Maintaining Status
Maintain F-1 Status
Maintain F-2 Dependent Status
Traveling Outside the U.S.
Renewing your Visa
Transfer your SEVIS Record
Program Extension
Reduced Course Load
Forms Library
Employment
Employment for International Students
Social Security Numbers
Taxation for F-1 Students
Curricular Practical Training (CPT)
Optional Practical Training (OPT)
STEM OPT Extension"
"https://www.liberty.edu/graduate/","Enhance Your Career Potential with a Graduate Degree
Develop your skills while you learn from a world-class faculty in a Christian environment. Here, you can take advantage of the wide variety of graduate programs and specializations we offer in both residential and online formats.
Graduate Degree List (Master’s Postgraduate, and Doctoral Degrees)
Residential Graduate Admissions
Online Graduate Admissions
How The Graduate School Serves You
TGS is dedicated to bringing you distinctively Christian and academically excellent graduate programs. We do this by assisting Liberty’s schools and academic departments in graduate program development and maintenance.
Our school coordinates a variety of services through the Graduate Writing Center, the Research Ethics Office, and the Graduate Assistantship program.
Graduate Writing Center
Develop your writing skills with the coaches at the Graduate Writing Center. Appointments are available.
Writing Services
Online Writing Center
Graduate Assistantship Program
Add to your education experience by collaborating with professors and providing them with academic support. Not only will you grow both academically and professionally, but the Graduate Assistantship Program also provides a scholarship to pay for school and a stipend as compensation for your hard work.
Apply for a Graduate Assistant position
If you would like information about the duties, responsibilities, and requirements for specific department Graduate Assistants, you can reach out to the departmental liaisons."
"https://www.liberty.edu/equity-and-inclusion/","We do Diversity Biblically 
The Office of Equity and Inclusion supports LU by fostering a co-educational student body and an inclusive environment that represents the Body of Christ. This is accomplished through value-driven recruitment and growth-minded retention that releases trained champions for Christ, ready for their calling.
Recruitment
Liberty University supports access to Christian higher education by providing scholarships, hosting diversity College for a Weekend programming, and developing outreach partnerships with like-minded leaders and organizations.
Retention
We invest in student retention by providing mentorship guidance, creating character-building service opportunities, and hosting community enriching cultural celebrations that foster belonging.
Community Outreach
We partner with regional and national organizations to establish outreach, engagement, and service opportunities investing in communities across the country.
Events 
We plan events that provide campus-wide enrichment and celebrate diversity while increasing cultural awareness.
OEI Fellowship
We mentor our scholarship recipients, building community and student success.
Non Discrimination Policy:
Liberty University does not engage in unlawful discrimination or harassment because of race, color, ancestry, religion, age, sex, national origin, pregnancy or childbirth, disability or military veteran status in its educational programs and activities. Liberty University maintains its Christian mission and reserves its right to discriminate on the basis of religion to the extent that applicable law respects its right to act in furtherance of its religious objectives. Read More
OEI Locations and Hours
Main Office – Green Hall 1569
IDE Lounge – Montview Student Union 2760
Monday – Friday
8:00 a.m. – 5:00 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/title-ix/","OEC: Safe, Supportive, Neutral
At the Office of Equity and Compliance (OEC), we are committed to creating a safe environment, providing supportive measures, and ensuring a neutral process.
The OEC oversees compliance with the University’s Sexual Misconduct/Title IX Policy, the Non-Discrimination and Equal Opportunity Policy, and the Jeanne Clery Act which includes the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA). 
Did you know that September is Campus Safety Awareness Month? Click here to learn more about how you can stay safe on our campus!
News and Events:
Online Courses!
Click here to access information on the OEC required training courses in Canvas!
Be Safe and Stay Alert:
Champion Safe!
Download Liberty’s Safety App to be in the know on emergency alerts and also have a list of emergency contacts at the touch of your fingertips.
You can also review Liberty’s Emergency Guide and Annual Campus Security & Fire Safety Report to learn more about the University’s standards and expectations for campus and individual safety.
Information for Respondents
If you have been accused of sexual misconduct or discrimination, there is helpful information available for you.
Prevention, Awareness & Training
Helpful information on preventing sexual misconduct, awareness events and efforts, and training available to students, staff, and faculty.
Amnesty 
The Amnesty policy allows you to share your experiences with the OEC without fear of disciplinary action from the University for Liberty Way violations related to your case.
Title IX
Title IX prohibits sex-based discrimination and violence. Learn more about the University’s Title IX policy and procedures.
The Jeanne Clery Act 
Learn more about the Jeanne Clery Act and how it helps us continue our commitment to safety and support.
Confidential Support 
We care about your privacy and offer confidential support as you walk through our process. Review this page to see options for your confidentiality.
OEC Quick Links
Immediate Steps After a Sexual Assault
FAQ
Reporting Obligations for Employees and Faculty
Report Something Else
OEC Policies
Help A Friend 
OEC Advisors
OEC Staff Training 
How to Get a Confidential Advocate
New Student Parent Packet 23-24
Our OEC Policies:
Liberty University is committed to providing a safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and working environment for all University community members. Liberty University does not engage in unlawful discrimination or harassment on the basis of race, color, ancestry, religion, age, sex, national origin, pregnancy or childbirth, disability, or military veteran status in its educational programs and activities, which includes admissions and employment. To report any type of Prohibited Conduct including sexual misconduct or discrimination, please contact the OEC or the Title IX Coordinator.
OEC Policies at Liberty University
Follow Us on Instagram"
"https://www.liberty.edu/disability-support/","LU Accommodate is a new accommodation tool offered by the Office of Disability Accommodation Support (ODAS) that streamlines the review, approval, and delivery of accommodations. With LU Accommodate, students with documented disabilities can easily manage accommodation requests and related services.
For more information or if you have questions regarding accommodations or documenting disabilities, please visit ODAS.
Log in to LU Accommodate
New to LU Accommodate? Click here to request accommodations!
Welcome to ODAS
The Office of Disability Accommodation Support (ODAS) exists to provide equal access to students with documented disabilities and temporary medical conditions. We arrange reasonable accommodations upon request and make every effort to ensure that our campus is fully accessible to all students.
Attention Faculty: See the accommodation advancements on our new Closed Captioning and Faculty Resources pages.
Receiving Accommodations (Residential Students)
ODAS is committed to providing accommodations in a timely fashion. A student requesting accommodations must contact our office and submit disability documentation from his or her licensed healthcare provider. A Disability Support advisor will meet with the student to discuss appropriate accommodations and resources, notify his or her professors of the accommodations, and advocate for the student as needed.
Documentation of the Disability
It is the student’s responsibility to disclose the disability to ODAS for the purpose of receiving accommodations. If the student fails to do so, professors and others are not obligated to accommodate the disability. The accommodation process begins with the student submitting written documentation of the disability to ODAS. Examples of acceptable documentation include a copy of the student’s high school IEP or 504 plan, psychoeducational evaluation, or letter (on letterhead with signature) from the student’s physician or therapist. Documentation can be faxed (434-582-3858), scanned and emailed (odas@liberty.edu), or hand-delivered to our office (DeMoss Hall 1264).
Intake Meeting
Once the documentation has been received by ODAS, the student will be contacted to set up a short intake meeting to discuss possible accommodations and helpful campus resources.
Academic Accommodation Requests
After the initial meeting with an ODAS Advisor, a student who requests academic accommodations is required to fill out an “Semester/Term Request” in LU Accommodate each subsequent semester, giving ODAS staff permission to post the student’s accommodations. The student is encouraged to follow up with his or her professors regarding details of the accommodation request (i.e. modified attendance or a make-up test) and self-advocate as needed.
Non-Academic Accommodations – Housing, Dietary, and Support Animals
Please note that each of the following request processes is different. Questions can be directed to accessibility@liberty.edu.
Housing Accommodations
Dietary Accommodations
Emotional Support Animal or Service Dog
Additional Accommodations
Alternate Textbook Services
Deaf/Hard of Hearing Services 
Deaf and Hard of Hearing Service Request Form – (Classroom and Outside of Classroom interpreting for LU students only)
For Liberty University Interpreting Services, please visit the LUIS website.
Report a Barrier Around Campus
Institutional Responsibilities
Reasonable Accommodations
Temporary Medical Conditions
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability against students in institutions of higher education. Section 504 mandates “reasonable” accommodations to provide equal program access to all students with disabilities. Faculty must provide accommodations that meet the needs of each student with a disability.
Resources
Disability Grievance Policy and Procedures
Osborne Assistive Technology Lab
Scholarship Resources
Service Animal Policy
Service Animal Awareness
Tutoring Services
Writing Center
Academic Mentoring
Have Questions?
Contact ODAS: We’re here to help!
odas@liberty.edu
DeMoss Hall 1264
(434) 592-4016
Need to Report a Discrimination Complaint?
Speak Up today by reaching out to the Office of Equity and Compliance.
Submit an Incident Report"
"https://www.liberty.edu/club-sports/varsity-club/","Skip to main content
Scoreboard
Dance
vs Liberty University Homecoming
Dance
vs Brigham Young University
Dance
vs Virginia Tech
Dance
vs New Mexico State University
Dance
vs Coffeehouse
Dance
vs University of Virginia
Dance
vs Concordia University Irvine
Dance
vs Dance Clinic & Tryouts
Cycling
at Mountain Bike Race
Cycling
at Mountain Bike Race
Racquetball
vs Tryouts
Ski & Snowboard
vs Tryouts
Beach Volleyball
vs AVCA Men's Alliance Fall Event
Men's D3 Hockey
at Potomac Patriots
Beach Volleyball
vs AVCA Men's Alliance Fall Event
Cycling
at Appalachian State University
Triathlon
at Patriots Triathlon
Beach Volleyball
vs AVCA Men's Alliance Fall Event
Cycling
at Appalachian State University
Ski & Snowboard
vs Tryouts
404
YOU TOSSED AN AIR BALL!
The page you are looking for no longer exists."
"https://www.liberty.edu/flames/athletics-facilities/williams-stadium/","ATHLETICS FACILITIES – WILLIAMS STADIUM
Stadium Quick Facts
Name: Williams Stadium
Opened: October, 1989
Capacity: 25,000
Surface: Astroturf 3D3 Rootzone Blend
Latest Renovation: August, 2018"
"https://www.liberty.edu/flames/athletics-facilities/vines-center/","[gallery link=""none"" columns=""1"" size=""full"" display=""slider"" wpmf_folder_id=""380"" ids=""334259,334265,334256,334250,334253,334247,334262,333599,333602,333605,333632,333635""] 
The Vines Convocation Center, which opened in November 1990, is the home of Liberty University men’s basketball. The facility, which also plays host to women’s basketball games, volleyball matches, Liberty University Convocation services, and concerts, has undergone extensive renovations in recent years. The Vines Center features three practice courts (1.5 each for men’s and women’s basketball), four spacious locker rooms, a weight room, a training room, men’s and women’s basketball team rooms, a team dining room, basketball coaches offices, a built-in TV studio, a center-hung scoreboard and a suite atop the seating bowl."
"https://www.liberty.edu/flames/flames-club/","Training Champions for Christ
Flames Club Members can support student-athletes both on and off the field while enjoying exclusive member benefits.
Join Now 
Quick Links
Pregame Tailgate
2023 Flames Club members at the Eagle ($150) Level are able to participate in the pregame tailgate hosted in the IPF at Fan Fest before each home football game! Season passes will be $96 each. Single-game passes are $16 each.
Call or text the Flames Club at (434) 582-2582 for more information or to purchase the pregame tailgate meals!
Membership & Annual Giving
Starting at only $75, Flames Club Memberships are a great way for Flames Nation to support Liberty Athletics and receive awesome benefits including priority seating, parking, gear, and more!
Join Now
Learn More
General
Enriching the lives of current and future Liberty student-athletes
Membership gift, window decal, name in game programs, electronic newsletter
Home and away ticket priority, including postseason events
Ability to personally select seats in priority order
Autographed game ball from sport of choice*
Basketball
Priority to purchase Men's Sideline seats
Option to purchase Women's Club Seats
Priority to purchase Men's Club Seats
Parking pass assigned based on Flames Club priority order (season ticket holders only)
Priority to purchase Men's Loge Boxes
Priority to purchase Men's Courtside Seats
Football
Option to purchase Member Seats
Yellow, Orange, Purple, Pink, Teal, or Lime parking pass (season ticket holders only)
Invitation to pregame tailgate in Indoor Practice Facility**
Option to purchase Premium Member Seats
Option to purchase Outdoor Club Seats***
Option to purchase Cabana
Option to purchase Luxury Indoor Seats
Red or Blue Parking Pass (season ticket holders only)
Personalized Silver Lot Parking Pass (season ticket holders only)
Honorary Captain and four sideline passes for one game****
Invitation to travel with a team to one away event*****
Baseball
Option to purchase general admission seats
Orange Lot Parking Pass (season ticket holders only)
Option to purchase Indoor Club Seats
*Benefit available to new members at this level or higher
**Admission charged and advance purchase required
***Includes Club Pavilion admission and hospitality privileges
****Priority given to new members at this level
*****Subject to availability and limited to one trip with one team per academic year
Tickets & Parking
Flames Club Members receive priority seating and parking for season tickets, away games, and postseason tickets in addition to access to exclusive Flames Club Events throughout the year. 
Learn More
Football Luncheons
Join Us For Luncheons On The 3rd Floor Club Room With Coach Chadwell!
Come hear from Coach Jamie Chadwell for an inside scoop on the week's game!
Kickoff Luncheon - August 24th 12:00 P.M-1:00 P.M
Parent's Weekend - September 8th 12:00 P.M-1:00 P.M
Homecoming Luncheon - November 3rd 12:00 P.M-1:00 P.M
Buy Tickets
Sport-Specific Giving
Donate to a specific sport to help ensure its success at the national level.
Learn More
Legacy Giving
Leave your impact on Liberty Athletics through Legacy Giving! Naming agreements start at $1,000. Name something after a former teammate, coach, flames fan, or in honor of your family.
Learn More
Stories & Impact
Your gift to the Annual Fund helps ensure our coaches have the tools to recruit the top student-athletes in the country and give those athletes the financial ability to attend Liberty.
Learn More"
"https://www.liberty.edu/flames/athletics-facilities/kamphuis-field-liberty-softball-stadium/","Stadium Quick Facts
Name: Kamphuis Field at Liberty Softball Stadium Opened: January, 2015 Capacity: 1,000 Playing Surface: AstroTurf with natural clay infield 
[gallery link=""none"" columns=""1"" size=""full"" display=""slider"" wpmf_folder_id=""380"" ids=""333293,333305,333296,333287,333299,333302,333284,333281,333290""] 
Recognized as one of the top collegiate softball facilities since its opening in 2015, Kamphuis Field at Liberty Softball Stadium provides softball fans a great venue to watch high-quality softball action. The stadium includes 1,000 chairback seats, home, visitor and umpires’ locker rooms, team room, situation room, coaches’ offices, indoor batting tunnels, two full bullpens, and an expansive athletic training room. The state-of-the-art pressbox houses all game operations, home and visiting radio booths, TV booth, and President’s suite. The stadium is prewired for broadcast, as most home games are broadcast by LFSN. On April 3, 2015, the field was named after Dwayne Kamphuis, a legendary fastpitch softball pitcher and financial supporter of Liberty University and the softball program. Kamphuis traveled the world playing in exhibition softball games as part of the renowned “King and His Court” team, headed up by Eddie “The King” Feigner."
"https://www.liberty.edu/flames/athletics-facilities/worthington-field-liberty-baseball-stadium/","Stadium Quick Facts
Name: Worthington Field at Liberty Baseball Stadium Opened: June, 2013 Capacity: 2,500 Playing Surface: AstroTurf 
[gallery link=""none"" columns=""1"" size=""full"" display=""slider"" wpmf_folder_id=""380"" ids=""333566,333572,333569,333587,333578,333581,333590,333575,333584,333563""] 
The stadium includes 2,500 chairbacks, locker room, four indoor batting tunnels, four luxury suites, offices for the baseball program, a weight room, team room, and a fully functional press area."
"https://www.liberty.edu/flames/tickets/","Ticket Office Hours 
Office Hours:
Monday through Friday
9 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Contact 
East Ticket Booth, Williams Stadium, 1971 University Blvd., Lynchburg, VA 24515"
"https://www.liberty.edu/about/","About Liberty
Who We Are
Get the world-class education and Christian foundation you’re looking for at Liberty University. Since 1971, Liberty has had a singular vision of developing Christ-centered men and women with the values, knowledge, and skills essential for impacting the world for Christ.
Our founder, Jerry Falwell Sr., dreamed of a university filled with men and women who would change the world for Christ. He envisioned a world filled with doctors, lawyers, teachers, entrepreneurs, and professionals from all walks of life who loved God and were the best at what they’d been called to be. He invited thousands of people to join him in this dream — and today we invite you to be part of that vision.
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
Located in Central Virginia, Liberty is a liberal arts institution with 15 colleges and schools and offers programs in fields such as education, counseling, religion, law, aviation, cinematic arts, business, and more. Part of the ASUN Conference, Liberty fields 20 NCAA Division I athletic teams and 40+ Club Sports teams, offering you an exceptional college sports experience.
Liberty graduates are sought after by prestigious companies for their integrity, personal discipline, and versatility. They are confident and competent, ready to make a lasting impact on their profession and their community.
A Broader Vision
Academic Excellence
Liberty University is an accredited evangelical liberal arts institution with 15 colleges and schools, including a law school, medical school, and school of divinity. With more than 700 programs of study from the certificate to the doctoral level, Liberty equips students with both classroom theory and practical experience, effectively preparing them to enter a competitive job market.
Academic Programs
Academic Facilities
As the primary academic building on campus, this impressive structure spans 500,000 square feet over four floors and houses computer labs, classrooms and student resource centers, and a rooftop terrace.
Freedom Tower is Liberty's architectural landmark. It is the tallest structure in Lynchburg, standing at 275 feet, and houses the John W. Rawlings School of Divinity. It also includes a special event space and an observation floor.
Named after Liberty’s founder, Jerry Falwell Library (JFL) boasts over 170,000 square feet, including a technology commons, 30 group study rooms, an automated storage retrieval system, a four-story book tower, multiple terraces and balconies, and a café.
The Center for Medical and Health Sciences is home to the College of Osteopathic Medicine and select programs of the expanded School of Health Sciences. This 140,000-square-foot center provides hands-on training through lab simulation and standardized patient education.
Home to one of the largest music schools in the country, the Center for Music and the Worship Arts consists of two linked 4-story buildings that span 141,000-square feet. It features a 1,600-seat concert hall and is equipped exclusively with Steinway pianos.
This four-story, 121,000-square-foot facility houses classrooms, an auditorium, and more than 30 different kinds of laboratories designed for hands-on learning.
Green Hall houses Liberty’s LaHaye Recreation and Fitness Center, the Tower and The Box Theaters, and the School of Law.
Accreditation

Accreditation ensures that Liberty University has met strict standards with regard to degree programs, faculty, administration, student support, and services.
About Our Accreditation
Liberty Online

A pioneer in distance education since 1985, Liberty provides exceptional resources to online students, including an online library, the Online Writing Center, a partnership with Tutor.com, the Office of Online Student Life, and knowledgeable and accessible academic advisors.
Liberty University Online
University Leadership

Executive Leadership
Board of Trustees
Thriving Athletics
Liberty’s 20 NCAA Division I athletic teams and 40+ Club Sports teams are dedicated not only to victory but also to superb sportsmanship — and they’ve got the trophies to prove it. Winner of 15 Division I Conference All-Sport Awards, Liberty Athletics holds over 190 NCAA Division I conference titles and two bowl-game victories. Club Sports teams have won 9 national titles across field hockey and wrestling.
Our practice and performance facilities are nationally acclaimed and provide opportunities for students studying medicine, sport management, and other health professions to work with athletes in real-world environments. Touted as one of the top destinations in the country to watch a collegiate baseball game, Liberty University provides students and alumni with a college sports experience they can be proud of.
Liberty Athletics
Athletic Facilities
The first of its kind in North America, the Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre offers year-round snowless skiing, snowboarding, and tubing. Snowflex is home to the Liberty Ski & Snowboard Team.
The Cook Tennis Center consists of 18 NCAA regulation courts, including 12 lighted courts for use anytime. The courts have elevated seating with chairbacks that are centered with three courts on each side. The center is used for NCAA competitions, intramural sports, and open play.
Liberty Softball Stadium features AstroTurf and a clay infield treated specifically to repel water, meeting NCAA regulations. It also includes locker rooms, 1,000 chairback seats, and a video scoreboard.
Liberty Baseball Stadium features full-length, major league-style dugouts, a turf playing surface, a fully equipped media area, two suites, a club room, and a spectator picnic area.
The LaHaye Ice Center is home to Liberty men's and women's hockey teams, as well as the synchronized skating and figure skating teams. The center accommodates 4,000 fans and has 10 luxury suites and a weight room. Skating hours are available daily for students and the public.
Home to Liberty University Flames Basketball and Volleyball teams, the state-of-the-art Liberty Arena opened in Fall 2020 and features 4,000 seats, a Club Room — complete with a Flames Club hospitality area and premium concessions — and 16 loge boxes with executive seats, waiter service, and full access to the Club Room. The space also holds staff offices and lockers rooms for student-athletes.
Renovated during Summer 2020, the facility is used for concerts, church services, conferences, and Convocation.
This 169,000-square-foot facility is home to one of 15 hydraulic-banked tracks in the United States. The 1,500-seat indoor track includes a six-lane, 200-meter track, training and weight rooms, locker rooms, concessions, and coaches’ offices.
The Liberty Athletics Center (LAC) is a 3-story, 60,000-square-foot athletic training facility for all 20 Flames NCAA sports teams. It features a 10,000-square-foot weight room, an athletic training and rehabilitation area, a complete academic center including classrooms and a computer lab, a club room, staff offices, and concessions.
The Liberty Natatorium is a state-of-the-art, 75,000-square-foot facility, home to Liberty's NCAA Division I women's swimming and diving team. It features an eight-lane, 50-meter pool, a 17-foot-deep diving well with a full tower, and a seating capacity of 1,300.
Convocation

A couple times a week, students gather for Convocation, where they hear from leaders that represent a wide variety of fields. Business leaders, professional athletes, ministers, educators, authors, politicians, and artists are invited to address students by giving insight into local and global issues. They enhance and broaden the students’ education by sharing perspectives that they might not otherwise encounter.
Through live broadcasts, Liberty’s online students and supporters join in from all over the world. Convocation gives students from across all disciplines a common experience. It broadens their horizons. It inspires them and encourages them to pursue excellence, to become Champions for Christ in whatever they do.
Convocation at Liberty
Campus Map

Liberty Campus Map
Notable Alumni
Liberty University graduates are equipped to impact the culture for Christ in every vocation. There are over 285,000 Liberty alumni influencing the world in their respective fields. Our graduates have found jobs with the U.S. Senate, Google, ESPN, Discovery Channel, Concerned Women for America, CNN, Bank of America, and more.
NFL running back and Liberty's 2016 Commencement speaker
Supreme Court reporter for Fox News and Liberty's 2013 Commencement speaker
Pastor, author, radio show host of “Ed Stetzer Live,” and regional director for Lausanne North America
Concerned Women for America president and CEO
Real estate entrepreneurs and authors
Two-time NCAA DI cross country champion and professional track and field athlete
Host of ESPN's ""Sunday NFL Countdown""
Six-time Grammy award-winning Christian music artist and former member of the Christian band dc Talk
Champions Start Here
Apply to Liberty and begin your journey today.

Apply to Liberty
The History of Liberty

In 1971, Pastor Jerry Falwell Sr. challenged his congregation at Thomas Road Baptist Church in Lynchburg, Va. to establish a Christian college whose students would “go out in all walks of life to impact this world for God.” Soon after, Lynchburg Baptist College became a reality.
Our History
A University Town

Liberty University’s campus is in Lynchburg, Va. Located in the Piedmont region of the state, Lynchburg is nestled in the foothills of the beautiful Blue Ridge Mountains, on the south bank of the historic James River, in a region rich in history, culture, and outdoor recreational opportunities.
About Lynchburg
Connect with Liberty"
"https://www.liberty.edu/about/executive-leadership/","Liberty University Executive Leadership

Maj. Gen. (Ret.) Dondi E. Costin, Ph.D. | President

Rev. Jonathan Falwell | Chancellor

Jerry Prevo | President Emeritus
President's Council
Scott Hicks, B.S., M.B.A., Ph.D.
The Provost and Chief Academic Officer is the administrative advocate for Liberty University’s undergraduate and graduate programs. The Provost and Chief Academic Officer is responsible for developing organizational structures, administering the academic budget, and appointing personnel to manage and execute the functions of all educational programs. The development and implementation of processes that assess the purposes, effectiveness, and quality of all current and proposed academic programs fall under his leadership. Additionally, the Provost and Chief Academic Officer manages the establishment of all creative and interdisciplinary academic programs offered through the university’s residential and online venues, as well as oversees the appointment and evaluation of faculty members and academic administration necessary for the maintenance of those programs. The Information Technology, Major Construction, and Facilities & Transportation divisions also report to the Provost and Chief Academic Officer. 
The Executive Vice President for Student Affairs serves as chief student affairs officer for the University by providing leadership for all student affairs programs including supervision of: Student Life, Community Life, Health and Wellness, Assessment, Student Government, Auxiliary Services, Campus Recreation and Logistics, the division of Inclusion, Diversity, and Equity, Office of Equity and Compliance, Office of Security and Public Safety (which includes Access Control, Environmental Health and Safety, LU Police Department, and Emergency Communications). 
The Executive Vice President of Enrollment Management & Marketing provides vision and leadership in the development, implementation, and achievement of strategic recruitment, retention, and graduation goals of the university. Driving unity in philosophy, mission, and objectives across both online and residential enrollment, he directs recruitment and marketing strategies, enrollment projections, budgets, and policies and procedures, as well as provides guidance for related academic and support departments. Responsible for the administration and operation of both sales (lead generation/development) and overall university branding, the Executive Vice President works to meet aggressive enrollment and retention goals, overseeing the day-to-day operations that support growth and add to the bottom line of the university. With a focus on strategic planning and goal-setting, the Executive Vice President contributes to university advancement by promoting brand and influence, monitoring and measuring enrollment progress, and adjusting processes accordingly to maintain optimal levels of both. This includes reviewing and evaluating program activities, allocating resources for greater program effectiveness and efficiency, and developing organizational and administrative policies and program objectives for consideration by the president. Additionally, the Executive Vice President oversees the financial management of all enrollment and marketing functions. 
The Director of Athletics reports to the president and oversees Liberty’s intercollegiate athletics programs which compete at the NCAA Division I level. The athletics director oversees the athletics, academic, spiritual, and social development of the University’s student-athletes. In addition, this position is responsible for the department’s administrative functions including development, marketing, fan experience and promotions, broadcast services, corporate and ticket sales, compliance, academic services, finance, personnel, communications, facilities and operations, sports medicine, nutrition, and strength and conditioning. 
The Executive Vice President of Development leads the Alumni Engagement, Development, Development Engagement, Donor Relations and Stewardship, Flames Club, and Planned Giving areas of the University. This position directs activities related to the planning, execution, oversight, and evaluation of fund raising, annual giving, alumni engagement, and donor relations in support of the operational and strategic direction of the University. 
The Chief Financial Officer serves as the Treasurer and is responsible for the financial operations of the university. This includes advising executives on financial matters and overseeing the collection, receipt, disbursement, and reporting of all investment and non-investment funds. The Chief Financial Officer ensures that policy development, risk management, and operations in Finance, Business Administration, Real Estate Management and Student Financial Services provide value to and align with the long-term strategic direction of the university. 
Senior Leadership
The Senior Vice President of Marketing monitors all internal and external university communications. Responsible for setting and reaching strategic marketing goals, the Senior Vice President of Marketing oversees all areas related to advertising and promotion, including the development of high-quality print and online materials, video production, and ad placement. Additionally, she liaises with special guests, coordinating their participation in prominent functions related to the Liberty University Board of Trustees and Commencement. 
The General Counsel reports to the president and is the chief legal officer of Liberty in charge of all legal matters pertaining to the university and its subsidiaries. The General Counsel has primary responsibility for overseeing all legal matters across a broad range of legal disciplines and geographic boundaries, including corporate law, securities compliance, transactional documents, licensing agreements, intellectual property, litigation, strategic initiatives, employment law, contract management, privacy, construction, international law, administrative law, regulatory compliance, and other legal matters as needed. The General Counsel represents the university in all legal matters and advises the university, its committees, its officers, and the president on legal matters as required. The General Counsel directs and oversees the provision of all legal services to the university. 
The Senior Vice President of Major Construction reports to the Provost and Chief Academic Officer of the University to execute all major construction projects related to the campus master plan as they progress from design through completion of construction and final occupancy. Duties include internal resource scheduling, management, and supervision of all construction budgets, and coordinating construction activities with other departments and outside agencies as well as full coordination of all design disciplines. 
The Executive Vice President of Human Resources provides strategic direction and tactical support for institution-wide human capital management. This position also oversees the delivery of HR policies, programs, benefits, and services for approximately 10,000+ full- and part-time faculty and staff. The Executive Vice President of Human Resources works collaboratively across campus to integrate high-quality human resources services throughout all facets of the university – making Liberty University an ""Employer of Choice."" 
The Senior Vice President of Finance and Chief Investment Officer reports to the Chief Financial Officer and is responsible over investment matters including investment services and reporting on receipts and disbursements of all investments and activities for the University. This includes being the primary contact for outside investment firms, as well as private and institutional financing, and leading the Accounting, Internal Audit, Investments, Financial Analytics, and Tax departments. 
The chief information officer (CIO) is responsible for selecting and supporting all administrative and academic information technology (IT) system operations, data centers, process automation, data queries and report writing, help desks, communication networks (voice and data), software development, user interface optimization, and IT security, as well as setting technology standards, policy, and compliance. In addition to these responsibilities, the CIO coordinates the alignment of IT strategy with business objectives by evaluating the overall information technology operations and project portfolio through business metrics. The chief information officer also oversees the reduction of technology costs across the entire university by increasing system utilization, ensuring that each student’s IT experience is streamlined and consistent. 
The Senior Vice President, Inclusion, Diversity, and Equity reports to the Executive Vice President of Student Affairs and is responsible for overseeing all diversity-related University efforts. This position is responsible for establishing inclusive institutional objectives and programming in the areas of community engagement, training, development, recruitment, retention, and accommodation. The Senior Vice President advises the Executive Vice President of Student Affairs on all matters of inclusion, diversity, and equity. This fosters a campus environment free from both unbiblical and unlawful discrimination. 
The Senior Vice President of Equity Compliance oversees the Office of Equity and Compliance and works with all divisions of the University, subsidiaries, and other stakeholders. Responsibilities include oversight of Liberty University’s compliance efforts, including the Clery Act, Campus Security and Safety reporting, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, as well as other laws and rules relating to sexual harassment, sexual misconduct, gender and interpersonal violence, sexual assault, and related policy violations (collectively referred to below as “gender harassment”) on campus (e.g., Violence Against Women Act and the Clery Act) as well as compliance under the Liberty University Nondiscrimination and Equal Opportunity Policy. The Senior Vice President of Equity Compliance fosters a safe and supportive environment for the campus and surrounding applicable areas that is conducive to the academic pursuit and healthy personal development of all persons. 
The Senior Vice President of Campus Facilities & Transportation provides oversight and management for all facilities operations including Custodial Services, Grounds Maintenance, Building Maintenance, Transportation/Equipment Services, and Environmental Safety. He leads the Facilities Division in executing strategic planning for individual projects as well as for the facilities operations for the entire campus. Through cooperation with the end user, department leadership, engineers, architects, and contractors, the Senior Vice President ensures that every university facility meets the appropriate building codes, addresses the needs of the end users, and falls within the established budget. 
The Vice President of Auxiliary Services reports to the Executive Vice President of Student Affairs to oversee all aspects of Dining, Vending, and the Fairfield Hotel, at the University. This includes: Resident Dining, Catering, Flames Cash Program, Concessions, Athletic Training Table, Beverage pouring rights agreement, Snack, Beverage, and Laundry Vending, and the Fairfield Hotel Operations. 
The Vice President of Strategic Partnerships and Alliances reports to the Executive Vice President of Development to identify, facilitate, and execute partnerships with individuals and organizations to advance the mission, strategic plan, and spiritual focus of Liberty University by developing partnerships that produce financial and strategic results for the University. 
The Vice President of Student Financial Services (SFS) is responsible for the operations of the university in the Financial Aid, Student Accounts, and Military Affairs divisions. This includes the administration of all federal, state, and institutional financial aid. Responsibilities include assisting students and families with the financial aid and financial check-in processes and maintaining all Title IV and other compliance standards required for the proper administration of financial aid funds. 
The Vice President for Inclusion, Diversity and Equity is responsible for leading the development and implementation of proactive equity and inclusion initiatives, which support the University’s desire to have culturally and ethnically diverse students, faculty, staff, and leadership, free from all unbiblical and unlawful discrimination. He has oversight over the Office of Institutional Equity and Inclusion. 
The Vice President & Athletic Director of Club Sports is responsible for LaHaye Ice Center, Liberty University Mountain Snowflex Center, Liberty University Equestrian Center and the Club Sports athletic programs. He works closely with university administration to ensure that the program accurately represents the mission and goals of Liberty University. 
The Vice President of Communications and Public Engagement is primarily responsible for Liberty University's communications strategy and public relations for both internal and external media. This includes providing counsel and assistance to executive leadership, and academic administration on all matters of university communication, media relations, and public affairs while leading the Liberty news office as the primary media liaison and university spokesperson. The Vice President of Communications and Public Engagement also oversees programming and content for the Liberty Champion. 
The Vice President of Campus Recreation and Logistics is responsible for the overall vision, strategy, and operations of the divisions of Campus Recreation, Campus Logistics, and other associated departments. This division is comprised of several departments, including Student Activities, Campus Recreation, University Events Office, Event Support and Material Movement, Postal Services, Warehouse Services, Print and Mailing Services as well as the various facilities they oversee. 
The Vice President of Real Estate reports to the Chief Financial Officer in managing all off-campus (non-academic/staff) real estate. Duties include asset management (leasing, budgeting, and operations) for all income producing properties as well as developing a master plan for all other off campus real estate. In addition, this position is the lead in the management of River Ridge Mall. 
The Vice President of Spiritual Development is responsible for the management and oversight of the co-curricular departments: LU Send, LU Serve, LU Stages, LU Shepherd, Worship Collective, and Online Engagement. This individual meets regularly and works with the executive directors of these teams to ensure the operations of their respective departments are in alignment with the vision of Spiritual Development, and ultimately, Liberty University. This person works closely with the Chancellor to advance Liberty’s mission, by expanding and strengthening the theological foundation of the student body and its leaders, through all co-curricular spiritual life, and particularly, in large-scale gatherings such as Convocation, Campus Community, and mission/outreach opportunities. 
The Vice President of Finance and Administration reports to the Chief Financial Officer to identify and execute opportunities for growth, improved productivity, and organizational effectiveness. In addition, the vice president oversees the university's offices of Budget and Financial Planning and the Strategic Analysis Team. The vice president also represents LU to major stakeholders including related entities and subsidiaries. 
The Vice President of Security & Public Safety reports to the Executive Vice President of Student Affairs and oversees all matters involving the safety and security of the LU Community, its affiliates, and visitors. This position is responsible for Access Control, Environmental Health & Safety, Emergency Management & Community Engagement, and the Liberty University Police Department. Additionally, this position partners with every area within university leadership to ensure compliance with all local, state, and federally mandated safety compliance laws, rules, and guidelines. This position works closely with the Office of Equity and Compliance as well as builds and directs broader partnerships with local government entities and law enforcement agencies to ensure the safest and most secure environment possible for the LU Community. 
The Vice President of Software Development and Engineering will direct, plan, and ensure that the efforts of Systems Operations, Software Development, and Security align and further the mission of Liberty University. Collaborating with other stakeholders, the Vice President will clearly communicate the department's efforts to support and further the university's goals across individual departments. Additional responsibilities include assisting with maintaining the department budget, supporting the continuation of staff education, and fostering innovative solutions for customers needs. 
The Vice President of Information Services and Analytics is generally responsible for directing the planning and support of information systems and will provide focused, business-minded IT leadership, emphasizing IT's measurable contribution to business success and business metrics. The vice president will lead technology planning by collaborating with university leadership on implementing best practices and ensuring objectives are achieved while emphasizing re-use of technology and fiscal responsibility in budget impact."
"https://www.liberty.edu/about/liberty-university-quick-facts/","Liberty University Quick Facts
Summary
Liberty University Trains Champions for Christ with the values, knowledge, and skills essential for impacting tomorrow’s world.
Accreditation
See Liberty University’s Institutional and Program Accreditation page.
Motto
“Knowledge Aflame”
Location
Lynchburg, Virginia
Founded
1971
Campus
Over 7,000 acres
Over 7.5 million sq. feet of building space
Over 177 buildings and structures
Enrollment
Total enrollment exceeds 130,000
40,000 military-affiliated students
Over 700 international students
Academic Programs
Over 700 unique programs of study (some available both residentially and online) 
Over 350+ residential programs 
Over 200 undergraduate
45 graduate with 100+ specializations
7 doctoral
Over 600 online programs 
Over 150 undergraduate
Nearly 300 graduate
16 postgraduate
Over 100 doctoral
15 colleges and schools
Student Profile
Residential: 46% Male, 54% Female
Online: 40% Male, 60% Female
Combined: 41% Male, 59% Female
52% of residential students live on campus
48% of residential students commute to campus
The student body represents all 50 states (and Washington, D.C.), and 70+ countries (residential & online)
Liberty University students volunteer more than 500,000 hours per year
Faculty Profile
Student/Professor Ratio 
18:1 Residential
17:1 Online
18:1 Combined
Over 3,500 full and part-time faculty
Athletics
20 NCAA Division I athletic programs
40+ Club Sports teams
6 NCAA Division I individual national championships
Over 190 NCAA Division I conference titles
15 Conference All-Sport Award wins in 23 years
Over 500 student-athletes"
"https://www.liberty.edu/map/","Invalid upstream proxy credentials"
"https://www.liberty.edu/about/history-of-liberty/","History of Liberty
Through those founding years, students and faculty were inspired to influence the moral and ethical course of America. Subsequently, the school’s name officially changed to Liberty Baptist College in 1975, and the colors were changed to red, white, and blue in 1976. The college achieved accreditation with the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges in 1980.
By 1985, the school had become recognized as an accredited university, adding programs and garnering recognition from both mainstream culture and the world of academia. Liberty also pioneered a distance learning program that year, launching what is now known as Liberty University Online.
With the passing of the founder in 2007, his son, Jerry Falwell Jr., became chancellor and president of the university. At the 2007 Commencement ceremony, just days after his father’s passing, then Chancellor Falwell proclaimed, “We have prepared for this transition for 15 years or more. All is well at Liberty.”
Liberty’s journey has been one of facing giants, making the impossible possible, watching fervent prayer move mountains, and Training Champions for Christ.
Then & Now
Standing on the shoulders of more than two millennia of Christian scholarship, Liberty University emphasizes the pursuit of knowledge in every discipline.
A world-class liberal arts university with 15 schools and colleges, Liberty offers more than 700 programs from the certificate to the doctoral level ranging from medicine, biology, chemistry, and engineering to design, music, religion, law, and more.
Founded in 1971 in Lynchburg, Va., Liberty has grown from a small college of 154 students into a university with a residential student body of over 15,000.
Preparing students to be doctors, educators, ministers, lawyers, aviators, counselors, engineers, and more, Liberty is committed to developing tomorrow’s leaders — men and women of character whose impact will extend beyond their professions to change the world around them.
Our Founder
Dr. Jerry Falwell
Aug. 11, 1933 – May 15, 2007
In June of 1956, at the age of 22, Jerry Falwell started Thomas Road Baptist Church in his hometown of Lynchburg, Va., with 35 members. Also in 1956, Falwell began the “Old Time Gospel Hour,” a nationally syndicated radio and television ministry that has led millions to Christ.
In 1967, Falwell implemented his vision to build a Christian educational system for evangelical youth. He began with the establishment of Lynchburg Christian Academy, an accredited Christian day school for grades K-12 . In 1971, he founded Liberty University, an accredited Christian university for evangelical believers. In 1985 Falwell announced his goal of 50,000 students.
Today his vision has been fulfilled, with more than 15,000 students attending classes on campus in Lynchburg, Va., and more than 94,000 students taking courses through Liberty University Online.
Read Full Biography"
"https://www.liberty.edu/lucom/admissions/","Why Choose LUCOM for Your DO Degree?
Residency Match Rates
LUCOM graduates match at high rates with multiple specialties.
See how our graduates have matched
Competitive Tuition & Fees
Get competitive rates while you experience a lower cost of living in Lynchburg, VA.
Tuition & Fees
Scholarships & Aid
Collaborative Student Body
Develop life-long friendships in a supportive atmosphere.
Hear what LUCOM students have said
Christian Worldview
Enjoy a student-centered curriculum that is distinctively Christian.
Discover more about LUCOM
Attend an Admissions Event
Request Info
Apply
Become Your Best at LUCOM
Getting Started
PreMedical School Checklist
Admissions Requirements
Admissions Checklist
Applying to LUCOM
Application Process
Transcript Submissions
Transfer Applications
Additional Info
Tuition & Fees
Financial Aid
Student Testimonials"
"https://www.liberty.edu/law/admissions/","Home › Law School Admissions
Are you ready to take this crucial first step in making your law dream become a reality? We know that taking your Law School Admission Test (LSAT) and getting all your documentation straight can be a challenge.
Because of this, we’ve made it our mission to help you every step of the way. Let our law school admissions staff guide you through the application process.
We will answer your questions and help you with financial aid, scholarships, and debt management.
Contact Us (434) 592-5300 lawadmissions@liberty.edu
Apply Request Info Tuition & Fees
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
View the School of Law Viewbook
Requirements
Standards for Admission
Begin your law school admissions process by taking the Law School Admission Test (LSAT) and subscribing to the Credential Assembly Service (CAS). Learn more about our application requirements.
Selection Process
Your acceptance into Liberty Law is based on our estimate of your potential for academic success. We consider all of the information provided when making our decision. No one factor such as your LSAT score, GPA, or letters of recommendation is conclusive.
We review applications on a rolling basis and make decisions after your application is complete.
Non-Discrimination Policy
View Non-Discrimination Statement
Check Your Application Status
Monitor your application’s progress with the Applicant Status Online (ASO) checker. You will receive your username and password for the ASO checker by email. If you do not receive these, or if you need assistance with your account, please notify the Office of Admissions.
Check Your Application Status
If you do not receive an email notification within four weeks of your application completion date, please contact us.
Accepting an Offer of Admission
Offers of admission to entering first-year students are made only for the fall semester.
Confirmation Deposit
In accepting an offer of admission, you must sign and return the acceptance agreement along with a $300 confirmation deposit payable to Liberty University School of Law. The deposit is non-refundable and non-transferable, but it will be applied toward your tuition or fees.
Make Confirmation Deposit
Transcripts
To apply, you must take the Law School Admission Test (LSAT) and register with the Credential Assembly Service (CAS). To meet the official transcripts requirement, we will accept official transcripts that have been sent to LSAC which are included in your CAS report. If transcripts are sent to LSAC before a degree has been conferred, we will require a final official transcript with degree conferral to be sent directly to us from the educational institution prior to October 15.
Send transcripts to:
Office of Admissions
Liberty University School of Law
1971 University Blvd.
Lynchburg, VA 24515"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/military-students/","Liberty University Military Students
Service. Integrity. Honor.
These are virtues you’ve built your life around. They drive you to work hard, press on, and meet challenges with grit and determination for the sake of those who count on you.
These values drive us, too. At Liberty University, it’s our privilege to serve those entrusted to us, and we work hard to ensure that those who have dedicated their lives to the good of others can continue to succeed — in any field.
How Much Will My Education Cost?
Your GI Bill®, Tuition Assistance, and other military education benefits are designed to help you succeed both in military and civilian life, so we want to help you make the most of them.
Application fees are waived for service members and veterans, and additional tuition discounts are available for First Responders. Please review our Military Tuition Discounts for additional information. For detailed information on financial and academic resources you can review our consumer information for military students.
Do I Qualify for Liberty’s Military Benefits?
Service is important to us, so whether you’re currently serving in the Armed Forces, have served, or are married to someone with military experience (military spouse as defined by Liberty University), we’re here to serve you. See specific criteria on our Military Benefits Guide.
Liberty’s military benefits are available to:
Active Duty members of the U.S. Armed Forces
Reserve/National Guard
Veterans/Retirees
Spouses of service members and veterans/retirees
Current Department of Defense employees
“We in the military understand what personal sacrifice is. 
The valor, the character, the selflessness, the commitment that we all must give to our country is what you brought to the education process. 
There are people all around the globe right now, military members, taking the God-given character that you have and applying it to their education, and we are so proud of you.”
– Dr. Steven Keith
Director of the Liberty University Center for Chaplaincy
2016 Military Graduate Recognition Ceremony
Military Child Discount
We recognize the sacrifice military members and their families make. As a thank-you, we now offer a 15% discount off our regular full-or part-time tuition rates for new online students, regardless of age, whose parent(s) served honorably in the military.* Please contact us at (800) 424-9595 for more information.
*Some exclusions apply. This cannot be combined with other discounts.
Frequently Asked Questions
Is Liberty University accredited?
Is Liberty University a Yellow Ribbon school?
Will courses fit around my schedule?
Is Liberty a religious school?
Are there any entrance exams?
Are there any discounts for dependents of military families?
*GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government website at https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/osd/lu-stages/convocation/","Convocation
Wednesday & Friday | 10:30 a.m. | Vines Center
Liberty University’s Convocation is the world’s largest gathering of Christian students. Each year, we host more than 80 nationally known speakers from a variety of fields.
Convocation Schedule
Philosophy & Purpose of Convocation
Stream Convocation Live
Wednesday & Friday | 10:30 A.M.
Liberty University Convocation is streamed online for the majority of all guest speakers.
Watch Convocation Live on Facebook
Convocation Video Archive
Be challenged and grow in your faith with this archive of previous Convocation services.
Convocation Video Archive
Convocation Information
Suggest a Speaker
Submit Pre-Roll
Vines Seating Chart
Convocation FAQs
Convocation Safety Measures
With increased safety and security measures on campus, all persons attending Convocation services starting August 24, 2022, will go through a metal detector and bag check. Gates 1, 3, and 4 at Vines Center and gates East and West at Arena will open at 9:30 a.m.
Here are some suggestions that will aid in quick access:
Arrive early.
If possible, do not bring a book bag or any type of large bag unless it is clear. All bags entering the Vines Center will be searched.
If you are a Concealed Carry Permit (CCP) holder, make sure you have your valid LU CCP along with your valid LU ID.
Thank you in advance for your patience, cooperation, and understanding."
"https://www.liberty.edu/osd/lu-stages/campus-community/","Campus Community
Wednesdays | Campus Community is the central gathering place for worship and spiritual growth at Liberty. All spiritual life flows out of this Word-centered worship service.
Watch Campus Community Live
Watch Campus Community live on Wednesdays.
Watch Campus Community Live
Campus Community Video Archive
Did you miss a Campus Community event? Get caught up by visiting the Campus Community Video Archive! Campus Community Video Archive"
"https://www.liberty.edu/faith-and-service/","Faith and Service
Beyond the Classroom: A Life of Faith & Service
Grow in your faith as you participate in the wide variety of ministry and mission opportunities at Liberty University. Deepen your relationship with Jesus Christ and energize your personal ministry with weekly worship gatherings, local service projects, global mission trips, and an atmosphere that encourages cultural engagement. Become a Champion for Christ who impacts the world with the Gospel.
Office of Spiritual Development
Convocation
Wed., Fri., 10:30 a.m. in the Vines Center
Join us right here on the Liberty campus for the world’s largest weekly gathering of Christian students. Each year, we host more than 80 nationally known speakers from a variety of fields.
Convocation FAQ
Convocation Page
Campus Community
Wed., 7:30 p.m. in the Vines Center
Have a passion for the Lord? Join us each week for Campus Community — a Gospel-centered service featuring inspiring speakers and powerful worship.
Campus Community Page
Faith & Service Offices
LU Worship Collective
Liberty University’s Worship Collective is made up of teams of singers, musicians, actors, and creative artists who are passionate about sharing the gospel and encouraging other believers.
Many of our teams travel across the country ministering in a variety of venues.
If you are interested in getting involved, email collectivebooking@liberty.edu for audition information. Vocal, instrumental, and technical positions are available for both current and prospective students.
Student Leadership
Enjoy the active student leadership teams here at Liberty. Community Group Leaders will help you grow in Christ and develop meaningful relationships through group worship, Bible study, and prayer. And Residence Life student leaders are available on every hall, helping to make your college experience a positive one.
As a residential student, you’ll benefit from our student leaders who want to help you feel loved and valued. You’ll be spiritually discipled, and have someone praying with and caring for you. If you choose to become a student leader, you’ll have the opportunity to develop effective relational and ministry skills. Your experience on our team will help you lead with confidence in other settings.
Serving the Community

Impact the community that surrounds Liberty University and powerfully share your faith through action. Discover the many opportunities available to serve others through LU Serve.
Travel with a Mission

Gain a global perspective that reflects God’s love for all nations and people. LU Send fosters global and local awareness by sending teams to serve others during times of immediate need.
Student Service

Throughout the year, Liberty University students have dedicated countless hours to serving locally and globally. From washing the hands and feet of the homeless to blanket drives, students have gone above and beyond to display the love of Christ. Read more about student service.
Online Student Life
Get connected and stay engaged through Online Student Life. Whether you’re an online or residential student, we’ll equip you with resources that will help strengthen your faith and connect you with other students."
"https://www.liberty.edu/osd/lu-serve/","LU Serve exists to train Champions for Christ by providing engaging educational and ministry experiences for students. This is accomplished through intentional partnerships with organizations that embrace and support Liberty University’s mission and purpose. LU Serve provides meaningful service opportunities such as CSER and CSER trips, LU Serve Now domestic and international humanitarian aid and disaster relief trips, and Serve Lynchburg. LU Serve provides campus-wide exposure events such as Global Focus Week and the Serve Expo, inspiring and engaging workshops, and curated training sessions. Through these opportunities, students can learn from key practitioners, and partner with approved organizations, faculty, and staff to develop knowledge and skills which will help them prepare for a career and impact the world.
CSER
CSER exists to train students at Liberty University to apply a biblical worldview as servant leaders, to transform their communities for the glory of Christ, and to use their academics and passions to win at work. Philippians 2:4-5; Matthew 28:19-20. For more information, contact cser@liberty.edu or Chat Live.
Serve Events
Serve Expo
The Serve Expo is an annual event aimed to inspire, inform, and connect students, faculty, and staff with opportunities to serve others in the Lynchburg community through their passions, talents, and academics. Students, faculty, and staff will have the opportunity to hear from local practitioners, experience community engagement, and learn how they can serve alongside community organizations.
Global Focus Week
Global Focus Week (GFW) is an annual event aimed at raising global awareness among Liberty University students, faculty, and staff. Throughout GFW students will have the opportunity to hear from globally influential Convocation guests, connect with global workers, experience a variety of cultures, and participate in interactive events.
Serve Lynchburg
Serve Lynchburg is an annual event in which Liberty University students, faculty, staff, and Lynchburg residents join together with community partners to meet local community needs!
Summer Experiences
Summer Experiences are a curated list of domestic and international opportunities through LU Serve-approved organizations. All opportunities include a link to the organization’s external site where you can inquire with the organization directly for further information and apply through the organization’s application process. LU Serve does not coordinate any aspect of these opportunities and is not responsible for any part of the application process. Any questions should be directed to the relevant organization.
Serve NOW
LU Serve Now exists to train the next generation to be champions for Christ in the field of disaster and crisis response by providing humanitarian, spiritual, and psychological aid. Its mission is to minister to and serve the physical, emotional, and spiritual needs of individuals and communities, working alongside world-class organizations and leaders."
"https://www.liberty.edu/osd/lu-serve/serve-now/","LU Serve NOW
About LU Serve Now
Our vision is to train up the next generation to be champions for Christ in the field of disaster and crisis response by providing humanitarian, spiritual, and psychological aid. Our mission is to minister to and serve the physical, emotional, and spiritual needs of individuals and communities, working alongside world-class organizations and leaders.
The Serve Now program seeks to build the best culture of preparedness, equip students with the knowledge and skills to capably assist in catastrophic disasters and community development, and create multiple pathways for student engagement within the Serve Now program. For more information, email luservenow@liberty.edu.
Participation in Serve Now is limited to residential students as well as LU Online students who live within a one-hour driving distance from campus.
The Serve Now application period is currently closed. It will reopen at the start of the Spring 2024 semester. Check back for future updates.
Donate
Would you consider giving to help families impacted by disasters like hurricanes, war, wildfire, and flooding? We need support of friends like you to provide care for the physical, emotional, and spiritual needs of these individuals and communities.
All proceeds go directly to the Serve Now program so we can send students at a moment’s notice and provide other critical aid with like-minded partners. Your financial commitment to Serve Now is what makes it possible for students to bring relief and hope to vulnerable people facing their most desperate hour.
Donate Now
LU Serve Now Newsletter
We want students in Serve Now to continually feel connected to the program. This newsletter gives you inspiring recaps from recent trips, insights from current members, upcoming training designed for Serve Now members, and more! Each time the newsletter is updated, we will send an announcement through Canvas.
Newsletter
FAQ’s
Learn from answers to frequently asked questions about LU Serve Now.
FAQ’s
Where We Have Served"
"https://www.liberty.edu/osd/","Spiritual Life On Campus
Convocation
Wednesday & Friday 
10:30am | Vines Center
Liberty University’s Convocation is one of the world’s largest gatherings of Christian students. Each year, we host more than 80 nationally-known guests from a variety of fields.
Campus Community
Wednesday 
7:00pm | Vines Center
Campus Community is the central gathering place for worship and spiritual growth at Liberty. All spiritual life flows out of this Word-centered worship service.
Liberty Worship Collective
Liberty Worship Collective exists to cultivate and influence vibrant worship on campus and around the world.
LU Send
LU Send exists to develop Champions for Christ through academic enrichment and cultural engagement in student group travel, study abroad programs, and international internships.
LU Shepherd
LU Shepherd exists to develop Champions for Christ by fostering a holistic community through peer mentorship, pastoral care, and life-skills training.
LU Serve
LU Serve exists to develop champions for Christ through local, domestic, and international engagement opportunities.
Learn more about CSER
Online Engagement
About Us"
"https://www.liberty.edu/osd/online-engagement/","Get Connected
The best way to get connected to the spiritual channels of Liberty University is through our social media! Subscribe, like and follow us to let us meet you where you already are on the web.
LibertyOSD
@LibertyOSD
@LibertyOSD
50%
Campus Community
Have a passion for the Lord? Join us each week for Campus Community—a Gospel-centered service featuring inspiring speakers and powerful worship.
Wednesday | 7:00 P.M. | Vines Center
Watch Campus Community Live
50%"
"https://www.liberty.edu/worshipcollective/","ABOUT US
The Liberty Worship Collective exists as a community of next-generation worship leaders passionately committed to resourcing the Church with songs and media that deepen Its understanding and reverence for Christ. Compiled every year from musicians and leaders all across the world, individuals invited into membership with the Liberty Worship Collective are entrusted to serve as leaders for the largest current weekly gathering of Christian young people; Liberty University’s Convocation.
Learn More"
"https://www.liberty.edu/osd/lu-shepherd/","Welcome to LU Shepherd
LU Shepherd exists to develop Champions for Christ by fostering a holistic community through peer mentorships, pastoral care, and life-skills training. Our office is led by a team of dedicated professionals with a variety of ministerial backgrounds ranging from collegiate to church, to missions. The LU Shepherd team is passionate about training Resident Shepherds and Community Group Leaders to grow in Christ, who in turn, unite with our mission by investing in the spiritual growth of the student in their residences. In addition, LU Shepherds are visible across campus, focused on building relationships with students through casual conversations and more in-depth encounters. The ultimate goal of LU Shepherd is accomplishing Liberty’s mission of Training Champions for Christ."
"https://www.liberty.edu/about/doctrinal-statement/","Doctrinal Position
We affirm our belief in one God, infinite Spirit, creator, and sustainer of all things, who exists eternally in three persons, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit. These three are one in essence but distinct in person and function.
We affirm that the Father is the first person of the Trinity and the source of all that God is and does. From Him the Son is eternally generated and from Them the Spirit eternally proceeds. He is the designer of creation, the speaker of revelation, the author of redemption, and the sovereign of history.
We affirm that the Lord Jesus Christ is the second person of the Trinity. Eternally begotten from the Father, He is God. He was conceived by the virgin Mary through a miracle of the Holy Spirit. He lives forever as perfect God and perfect man: two distinct natures inseparably united in one person.
We affirm that the Holy Spirit is the third person of the Trinity, proceeding from the Father and the Son and equal in deity. He is the giver of all life, active in the creating and ordering of the universe; He is the agent of inspiration and the new birth; He restrains sin and Satan; and He indwells and sanctifies all believers.
We affirm that all things were created by God. Angels were created as ministering agents, though some, under the leadership of Satan, fell from their sinless state to become agents of evil. The universe was created in six historical days and is continuously sustained by God; thus it both reflects His glory and reveals His truth. Human beings were directly created, not evolved, in the very image of God, as either biologically male or female from the womb. As reasoning moral agents, they are responsible under God for understanding and governing themselves and the world.
We affirm that the Bible, both Old and New Testaments, though written by men, was supernaturally inspired by God so that all its words are the written true revelation of God; it is therefore inerrant in the originals and authoritative in all matters. It is to be understood by all through the illumination of the Holy Spirit, its meaning determined by the historical, grammatical, and literary use of the author’s language, comparing Scripture with Scripture.
We affirm that Adam, the first man, willfully disobeyed God, bringing sin and death into the world. As a result, all persons are sinners from conception, which is evidenced in their willful acts of sin; and they are therefore subject to eternal punishment, under the just condemnation of a holy God.
We affirm that Jesus Christ offered Himself as a sacrifice by the appointment of the Father. He fulfilled the demands of God by His obedient life, died on the cross in full substitution and payment for the sins of all people, was buried, and on the third day He arose physically and bodily from the dead. He ascended into heaven where He now intercedes for all believers.
We affirm that each person can be saved only through the work of Jesus Christ, through repentance of sin and by faith alone in Him as Savior. The believer is declared righteous, born again by the Holy Spirit, turned from sin, and assured of heaven.
We affirm that the Holy Spirit indwells all who are born again, conforming them to the likeness of Jesus Christ. This is a process completed only in Heaven. Every believer is responsible to live in obedience to the Word of God in separation from sin. Doing so produces a distinctly Christian lifestyle of practicing virtues and avoiding sin. Among other virtues, followers of Jesus Christ will: show evidence of the Holy Spirit living within them such as love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and self-control; put on compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, patience, forgiveness and supremely, love; seek righteousness, mercy and justice, particularly for the helpless and oppressed; love and side with what is good in God’s eyes and abhor what is evil in God’s eyes; uphold the God-given worth of all human beings, from conception to death, as the unique image-bearers of God; treat all people impartially, seeing them as equals before God and worthy of salvation; pursue unity and embrace people of all tribes and tongues as part of God’s design for humanity; uphold chastity among the unmarried and the sanctity of marriage between one natural-born man and one natural-born woman; be people of integrity whose word can be fully trusted; give faithful witness to the Gospel; practice good works toward all; and live lives of prayer and thanksgiving. Sinful acts are prohibited by God and include but are not limited to: worship of idols or gods other than the Lord God of the Bible; denying Jesus Christ as eternal, as God’s son in flesh, as resurrected, as Creator, as Lord or as Messiah who died for the sins of all people; rejection of Jesus Christ or rebellion against God; blasphemy; participation in devil worship, practice of the occult, astrology, fortune-telling, sorcery, or witchcraft; taking of innocent life; denial of birth sex by self-identification with a different gender; married persons sexually or romantically coupling with a person other than their spouse; sexual relations outside of marriage between one natural-born man and one natural-born woman; romantic coupling among persons of the same sex; prostitution; orgies; rape; drunkenness; use of profanity and vulgarity; injustice; making false statements; dishonest sales and exchanges of money; thievery; fits of rage; and illegal activity.
We affirm that God ordained three institutions with unique purposes in society: marriage, government and the church. God established marriage as a covenantal bond between a natural-born man and a natural-born woman to populate the earth, to raise and spiritually train children within a family, to provide the couple with intimate companionship, loving help and joy, and to serve as an illustration of the relationship of Jesus Christ to the church. God established civil government to protect its citizens, punish evil and reward good. God established the church as the entire body of believers with Jesus Christ as the cornerstone and the apostles as its foundation to evangelize, baptize and disciple people of all nations.
We affirm that a church is a local assembly of baptized believers, under the discipline of the Word of God and the lordship of Christ, organized to carry out the commission to evangelize, to teach, and to administer the ordinances of believer’s baptism and the Lord’s table. Its offices are pastors and deacons, and it is self-governing. It functions through the ministry of gifts given by the Holy Spirit to each believer.
We affirm that the return of Christ for all believers is imminent. It will be followed by seven years of great tribulation, and then the coming of Christ to establish His earthly kingdom for a thousand years. The unsaved will then be raised and judged according to their works and separated forever from God in hell. The saved, having been raised, will live forever in heaven in fellowship with God.
Adopted by the Board of Trustees April 16, 2021"
"https://www.liberty.edu/about/purpose-and-mission-statement/","Philosophy of Education
Liberty University is a distinctively Christian academic community. As such, Liberty continues the philosophy of education which first gave rise to the university, and which is summarized in the following propositions.
God, the infinite source of all things, has shown us truth through scripture, nature, history, and above all, in Christ.
Persons are spiritual, rational, moral, social, and physical, created in the image of God. They are, therefore, able to know and to value themselves and other persons, the universe, and God.
Education as the process of teaching and learning, involves the whole person, by developing the knowledge, values, and skills which enable each individual to change freely. Thus it occurs most effectively when both instructor and student are properly related to God and each other through Christ.
Statement of Mission and Purpose
Maintaining the vision of the founder, Dr. Jerry Falwell, Liberty University develops Christ-centered men and women with the values, knowledge, and skills essential to impact the world.
Through its residential and online programs, services, facilities, and collaborations, the University educates men and women who will make important contributions to their workplaces and communities, follow their chosen vocations as callings to glorify God, and fulfill the Great Commission.
Liberty University will:
Emphasize excellence in teaching and learning.
Foster university-level competencies in communication, critical thinking, information literacy, and mathematics in all undergraduate programs.
Ensure competency in scholarship, research, and professional communication in all graduate programs and undergraduate programs where appropriate.
Promote the synthesis of academic knowledge and a Christian worldview in order that there might be a maturing of spiritual, intellectual, social and physical value-driven behavior.
Enable students to engage in a major field of study in career-focused disciplines built on a solid foundation in the liberal arts.
Promote an understanding of the Western tradition and the diverse elements of American cultural history, especially the importance of the individual in maintaining democratic and free market processes.
Contribute to a knowledge and understanding of other cultures and of international events.
Encourage a commitment to the Christian life, one of personal integrity, sensitivity to the needs of others, social responsibility and active communication of the Christian faith, and, as it is lived out, a life that leads people to Jesus Christ as the Lord of the universe and their own personal Savior.
Approved by the Board of Trustees April 16, 2021"
"https://www.liberty.edu/campus-life/","Residential Commons I and II include 2 9-story residence halls that can house up to 2,200 students. Residential Commons III houses an additional 784 students, with a lounge between the two high rises and a large outside patio terrace.
Each two-person room features a private bathroom, and every floor has a coed common area and shared laundry facilities. Baskin-Robbins and Dunkin’ Donuts are located in the lobby of Residential Commons I."
"https://www.liberty.edu/students/sga/clubs/","Find a Club
About
Liberty University is home to over 100 student-led clubs. Clubs exist to connect students with similar interests and passions. Below is a list of Liberty University’s clubs, along with the names of their Club Presidents. If you are interested in learning more about how to start a club or have any questions pertaining to clubs, check out the documents on the Clubs Forms and Resources page or contact the Clubs Team at SGAClubs@liberty.edu.
If you are interested in receiving more information about any of the following clubs, please contact SGAClubs@liberty.edu.
Liberty University Student Government Association Clubs
A • B • C • D • E • F • G • H • I • J • K • L • M • N • O • P • R • S • T • U • V • W • Y • Z
A (Back to Top)
Abide 15:4: Our purpose is to provide a setting where students can memorize Scripture with like-minded peers while growing spiritually and forging lasting Christ-centered relationships.
President: Elizabeth Mathews & Benaiah De Leon
Accounting Society: We allow students to learn from experienced accountants and educate students on their future careers while socializing with students, professors, and potential employers.
President: Emily Motz
Across Generations: We express God’s love by serving seniors in the LYH community by providing fun activities and chances for our members to share their faith.
President: Marysol Hohl
Actuarial Club: Our goal is to provide resources and a community for any actuarial student. The road of an actuary is challenging, and we provide guidance for every step of the journey.
President: Benjamin Erickson
Africa Connect Association: Our purpose is to bring together African students to identify economic issues in Africa through research and to connect opportunities in Africa to business entities in the US.
President: Ikenna Patrick Nwobu
AI Competition Club: We spread the knowledge of AI and AI concepts among the student body of Liberty University.
President: Anthony Gorman
AIGA: The American Institute of Graphic Arts is the profession’s oldest official organization for design. LU’s chapter offers opportunities to grow as artists and professionals.
President: Benn Pattara
Alexander Hamilton Society: AHS sponsors international relations/national security panels and members have opportunities to be part of a national network of experts and professionals in many fields.
President: Ryan Mapes
Alpha Phi Sigma (Not Affiliated with SGA): Become a member of the national criminal justice honor society! Gain opportunities for scholarship and career advancement as you connect with the criminal justice arena.
Affiliated with Helms School of Government
American Marketing Association (AMA): We are a diverse group of students who are passionate about marketing. Our chapter provides valuable experiences and networking opportunities every year.
President: Cailey Ridge
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE): ASCE supports students’ interests in Civil Engineering. Members participate in on-campus construction site tours, hands-on activities, and hear from engineering companies.
President: Graham Baker
American Society of Safety Professionals (ASSP): We promote occupational safety and health principles to students and train them to create safe work environments by preventing workplace injuries, illnesses, and fatalities.
President: Jackson Seely
Asian American Association: Our purpose, goal, and mission is to build a welcoming community for Asians, Asian Americans, and those interested in sharing in Asian American culture.
President: Devin Phandara
ASL Club: Our purpose is to provide LU students interested in American Sign Language with opportunities to experience deaf culture through interacting with the deaf community.
President: Grace Forsburg
Association of Christian School International: Professional Association of Christian Educators (PACE): We help future educators combine our passions for teaching and Christ. We enrich the professional development of LU’s SOE students through service projects and fellowship.
President: David West
Association of Latin American Students (ALAS): ALAS provides a platform for Latin American students to grow as they are exposed to opportunities and events. Join our Latino community to grow and learn together!
President: Domenica Jones
Association of Students of African Descent (ASAD): We learn about Africa’s beauty and various cultures through activities, fellowship, and promotion of missions work, and we help connect domestic and international students.
President: Hatangimana Lea
Astronomy Club (Not Affiliated with SGA): We strive to understand more about creation around us. Anyone is welcome to join! Meetings are Tuesday nights at the Observatory, weather permitting.
Affiliated with College of Arts & Sciences: Department of Mathematics
Athletic Training Student Association: We train healthcare students in sports medicine to display God’s love through service and support them by fundraising, educational opportunities, and fellowship.
President: Abigail Maracle
Autism Advocates: Our purpose is to engage the campus and local community through awareness, education, and fundraising to positively affect those struggling with autism spectrum disorders.
President: Abby Snow
Aviation Safety Club: We seek to establish a safety culture within the School of Aeronautics. We educate students on aviation safety issues and equip students to foster a community of safety.
President: Denali M. Georges
B (Back to Top)
Barkada Club: We strive to create an inviting community for Filipinos, Filipino Americans, and those intrigued by Filipino culture to come together and unite.
President: Cassandra Morris
Bass Fishing Club: Our purpose is to inform LU students about the sport of bass fishing and allow students to participate in competitive bass fishing at a collegiate level.
President: Holden Zinda
Biology Club: The Biology Club promotes students engagement with creation through discussions of research, science experiences, internships, or outings to the zoo or hikes.
President: Genesis Schat
Brass of LU (BLU): We provide opportunities for brass instrumentalists to increase their knowledge of performance, research, entrepreneurship, and pedagogy through workshops and masterclasses.
President: Delaney Coy
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Club: We promote the self-defense art of Brazilian Jiu Jitsu in a Christian atmosphere through various practical training methods and encourage camaraderie and sportsmanship.
President: Shane Foster
Brazilian Student Association: We promote fellowship among Brazilian students, serve the community as Christians, and host events that bring Brazilian traditions to LU.
President: Ana Julia Escorcio Oliveira
C (Back to Top)
Campus Outreach: We foster a community with sincerity, depth, and intentionality in the faith. We equip students to pursue God, engage the lost world, and prepare for the Christian life.
President: Charlotte Dorman
Caribbean Student Association: CSA serves as a hub for Caribbean students that want a home away from home. We strive to educate and facilitate cultural diversity throughout the entire campus and Lynchburg.
President: Anabelle Knowles
Catholic Campus Ministry: CCM fosters community for those practicing Catholicism at LU. We allow both non-Catholics and Catholics to learn about the many expressions of Christianity without prejudice.
President: Gianna DeRosa
Chess Club: We welcome any chess player regardless of experience, and lessons are available. We provide opportunities to participate in tournaments and other competitive aspects of chess.
President: Harry Dykes
Chinese Culture Club: We learn about the Chinese culture and foster community among students. We use activities to educate students on this culture’s history and expand their appreciation for it.
President: Chloe Jensen
Chinese Student Christian Association: We seek to preach the gospel to the Chinese people and strengthen the Christian body. We use biblical teaching and spiritual leadership to train Chinese champions for Christ.
President: Binghui Wang
Club Psych: Club Psych exists so that students are able to learn about psychology-related topics from a Biblical worldview and use this knowledge to impact the campus and community.
President: Braeden Pitts
College Republicans: We provide opportunities to engage in the political process through education/campaigns. At LU, we promote Christ-following candidates who will keep America first in policy.
President: Jesse Hughes
Compassion @ LU: We partner with Compassion International to raise awareness for poverty, engage students in protecting the vulnerable, and create sponsorship opportunities.
President: Emily Del Grosso
Competitive Programming Club: A club to teach core programming concepts concepts along with preparing students to compete at the International Collegiate Programming Contest. We welcome all skill levels.
President: Cameron Kauffman
Contrails: Contrails helps students surround themselves with the right people and the right places to create the right opportunities for their aviation career. 
President: Trent Born
Council for Exceptional Children: CEC works to provide resources and opportunities to educate our Liberty community and to serve exceptional children through on-campus events and by partnering with TRBC iKids.
President: Maddy Grund
Creationeer Café: We seek to cultivate a community that grows ideas to glorify God by providing access to creative outlets, driven community, Christ-centered culture, and practical strategy.
President: Nathanael Breed
Creative Writing and Fiction Club: As a club of writers, poets, bards and book lovers who meet to escape the rigors of school, we welcome the pen experts and those who are just figuring out how to use one!
President: Myra Davis & Elisabeth Pate
Criminal Justice Club: We promote the criminal justice field through Bible studies, volunteer work, trips to criminal justice organizations, lectures with professionals, and firearms training.
President: Cecilia Crossett
Cru at Liberty: If ministry at local colleges and high schools interests you, join Cru! We also provide opportunities for international trips, social events, weekly Bible studies, and more.
President: MacKenzie Unruh
Cure U: We support hospitalized children and underprivileged families locally and globally by raising funds and moral support for Cure U International hospital in Zambia.
President: Asia Eskaros
Cybersecurity Club: We promote skills for the defense of our networks and computers so students can compete in cyber defense competitions and enhance LU’s reputation for technological excellence.
President: Caleb Chen
D (Back to Top)
Delight at Liberty: Delight is a nation-wide ministry with the mission of inviting college women into Christ-centered community that fosters vulnerability and transforms stories.
Presidents: Molly Pugh
Delta Mu Delta Honor Society (Not Affiliated with SGA): We are LU’s chapter of the business honor society. We recognize academic excellence in business students, foster their well-being, and network with the business community.
Affiliated with School of Business
Disney Club: We reminisce on our childhood memories by discussing Disney-related topics, playing Disney trivia, and interviewing Cast Members, Imagineers, and College Program Alumni.
President: Kristen Gerton
Drone Club: We promote safe and enjoyable flying of drones! Through meeting and events, we seek to not only fly drones for fun, but have competitions, learning sessions, and drone builds.
President: Tyler Faulkner
E (Back to Top)
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Club: We help make LU a safer place by teaching basic first aid skills to students and supporting those who are certified in EMS by helping find job and volunteer opportunities.
President: Jai Jai Forsberg
Enactus: We strive to benefit LU and the LYH community through personal connections and applying our entrepreneurial skills. We meet Thursdays at 5 in the Center for Entrepreneurship.
President: Koby Hagen
Engineering Missions and Research Club: We gather engineering students who can contribute research to society and stimulate a research mindset in students to promote research in academic and mission oriented topics.
President: Caleb Schaible
Eta Sigma Gamma Honor Society (Not Affiliated with SGA): As a National Health Education Honorary for Public Health/Health Ed students, we elevate the standards, ideals, competence, & ethics of students that follow NCHEC Competencies.
Affiliated with School of Health Sciences, Department of Public and Community Health
Evan Club: We equip and exhort LU students to actively evangelize and to see the people in our community of LYH go from death to life by accepting the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
President: Madyson Kohl
Event Planning Society: EPS is a great way to hear from and network with professionals in all different areas of the events industry such as wedding planners, florists, corporate planners, caterers, and more!
President: Lauren Carr
F (Back to Top)
Family and Child Development Association: We enhance the education of Family and Childhood Development students through opportunities to cultivate professional attitudes and competencies.
President: Sarah Kenthack
Fashion Design and Merchandising Association: We promote student involvement in the fashion industry through opportunities for community, ministry, and leadership by hosting monthly meetings and service projects.
President: Freedom Peters
Fencing Club: We allow students to learn to fence competitively and practice skills. We train students in sport fencing, promote the physical fitness of members, and provide fellowship.
President: Sean Ryan
Field Hockey Club: Our mission is for female students to enjoy a sport while meeting new friends. Through fun scrimmages, students can stop worrying about school and play an engaging sport.
President: Amber Zelem
Financial Management Association: We provide finance students with a network of business professionals who are dedicated to Christ and will provide resources to the next generation of finance-minded leaders.
President: David Winemiller
Forensic Science Club: We expose students to forensic biology and chemistry disciplines, establish a presence in the American Association of Forensic Science, and provide networking opportunities.
President: Kendall Oxford
French Club: We help students better their skills in the French language through conversation, activities, and learning about the cultures associated with the French language.
President: Madi Barrieau
G (Back to Top)
Game Design Club: All majors and backgrounds are welcome to join us as we work together to create video games to the glory of God. We meet up 1/week and have 1 game jam per semester.
President: Israel Ownbey
Gardening Club: The Gardening Club here at Liberty is an organization dedicated to growing plants. Gardeners of all skill levels welcome!
President: Jacob Grimes
Global Strategy & Supply Chain Association: We provide tools to stand apart in the business field through real-world experiences, training, projects, and supply chain management and international business events.
President: Catalina Montesinos
Global Studies Club: We engage with cultures and grow in faith through events with LU clubs/departments, hosting speakers, and interacting with the LYH global community. All majors welcome!
President: Grace Farina
God’s Covenant Love: We strive to share the Gospel of the Kingdom of God to people of all nations through teaching, serving, leading, worshipping, and gathering to fellowship with one another.
President: Geon Kang
Guiding Eyes for the Blind Puppy Raisers: We serve others through volunteering to raise guide dogs, equip students with dog training skills, and raise disability and service dog awareness at LU.
President: Victoria Hu
H (Back to Top)
Habitat for Humanity: We build homes for low-income families in and near LYH. Join us if you enjoy helping others, trying new things, and are seeking a hands-on experience. No skills required!
President: Susanna Lyon
Hallyu Club: We learn about Korean bands, music, and other Korean entertainment and use it to share the gospel. We host events to foster creativity and share a passion for hallyu culture.
President: Isabella John
Hans Gross Society: We research, study, and apply various multidimensional approaches using forensic science, behavioral science, and criminal investigative strategies to solve violent crimes.
President: Greyson Manor
Healthcare Leadership Association: We provide members with opportunities to honor God and serve with excellence in Healthcare Administration through guest speakers, service projects, and networking events.
President: Callie Hopper
High Flight Mentoring Program: We help incoming students adapt to life as a collegiate aviator and motivate current and incoming students to strive for their best as they pursue a career in aviation.
President: Grace Johnson
High-Performance Computing Club: We help incoming students adapt to life as a collegiate aviator and motivate current and incoming students to strive for their best as they pursue a career in aviation.
President: Aaron Beckley
History Honor Society – Phi Alpha Theta: We bring students, teachers, and writers of history together for intellectual exchanges which promote research and publication, all to encourage the study of history.
President: Adaline Nolley
I (Back to Top)
Improv Team (LU Cackle Hour): We want to bring people closer to the Lord by creating clean comedy to brighten peoples day and make them laugh by performing improv shows for the student body.
President: Lillian Good
Institute of Industrial and Systems Engineers: We promote the ISE profession through study, research, and discussion of the field and spread the word of Christ in our functions so engineers can do so in their careers.
President: Matt Nenninger
Interior Design Association (IDA): We strengthen students in the Interior Design program by providing resources and networking to aid them as they pursue professionalism in their future interior design careers.
President: Qin Raisley
International Aviator’s Club: We help international students to settle in the School of Aeronautics by assisting and guiding them throughout their study by mentoring them academically and spiritually.
President: Gyeongmin Kim
International Culture Club: Our purpose is to give students a greater appreciation for and knowledge of cultures, including a culture’s history, food, dress, spiritual state, and current missionaries.
President: Isabelle Miller
International Justice Mission: The Liberty International Justice Mission Club is here to raise awareness and support for IJM to end modern slavery within our lifetime.
President: Hazel Van Dyk
J (Back to Top)
Japanese Culture and Anime Club: We provide a space for those with shared interests to grow in their understanding of Japanese culture in an educational and fun manner.
President: Anna Holmes
Japanese Language Club: We learn conversational, listening, and writing skills of the Japanese language and give members chances to learn about Japanese culture and create connections.
President: Ryouga Kasper
K (Back to Top)
Korean Student Association: We help Korean students at LU grow in Christ with their unique cultural background. We offer Korean cultural events and aids for students focusing on spirituality and culture.
President: Joshua Cho
L (Back to Top)
Liberty Automotive Club: We provide valuable information and opportunities for business students interested in the automotive industry and also welcome interested non-automotive students.
President: Timothy Mastroberti Jr
Liberty Cubing Association: Our mission is to educate beginners, improve experienced Rubik’s cube solvers, and grow a God-centered community by hosting tournaments and providing an enjoyable atmosphere.
President: Tyler DiPietro
Liberty Gaming Club: We provide a Christian environment for videogame fans at LU to learn about past, present, or future videogame releases and organize competitions and demos of new or old games.
President: Gabriel Byers
Liberty Lego Club: Join us as we make creative and functional Lego set designs and further the mission of Creationeering.
President: Daniel Hall & John Maxwell
Liberty Running Club: The Liberty Running Club exists to connect runners of all levels to come together as a community that honors God by running and enjoying the gifts and talents He gave us.
President: Jacob Dryer
Liberty Space: We oversee Liberty Rocketry, which launches advanced sounding rockets to 30,000 ft, and Liberty Orbit, who wants to send LU’s first satellite to Low Earth Orbit by 2026.
President: Cole Derosett
Liberty Students Against Abuse: Advocating for systemic reform on campus to protect victims of sexual misconduct.
President: Jerry Zhang
Liberty Students for Life: We exist to establish a presence at abortion facilities, educate the uninformed on the nature and consequences of abortion, and offer hope and show love to women and families.
President: Summer Smith
Liberty Model United Nations Association: We advocate for the UN’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals through education, engagement, and collegiate Model UN competitions. All majors welcome!
President: Sophia Corredor
Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Truth: We discuss political, social, and religious issues prevalent in our society and help students develop a biblical worldview when analyzing these currents and issues.
President: Allie Groat
M (Back to Top)
Manna Club: Instead of letting unused food swipes go to waste, we collect viable donations from students every Friday and donate them to food banks around the LYH area.
President: Lake Heath
Math Club: Our purpose is to sponsor scholarly and social activities to develop an appreciation for math. We encourage interest in all areas of mathematics for students in any major.
President: Emily Bracco
MedServe: MedServe looks to serve the community of Lynchburg and beyond with a special focus on medical service opportunities. CSER opportunities available!
President: David Johnson
N (Back to Top)
National Association for Music Educators (NAfME): We provide opportunities to learn from skilled music educators, music advocacy specialists, Praxis II exam study sessions, and hands-on opportunities to teach music education.
President: Bradyn Taylor
National Collegiate Club Golf Association: We compete at golf tournaments against other public colleges nearby without being a part of the Division One schedule. Tryouts are held at the beginning of each semester!
President: Thomas Steffen
National Society of Collegiate Scholars (NSCS): We recognize high achieving underclassmen in all majors, provide opportunities for leadership development, and uphold the Association of College Honor Societies standards.
President: Hannah O’Berry
National Society of Leadership and Success: We are a national leadership honor society that provides a step-by-step program to build leadership skills and prepare members for their personal and professional lives.
President: Victoria Raven
Network of Enlightened Women: We educate, equip, and empower women to be principled leaders for a free society. We send out weekly “NeWs” letters about on-campus events, and host a bi-weekly book club.
President: Karrington Maxwell
Nexus: We mentor incoming students by providing resume workshops, campus activities, and academic success strategies so they can become familiar with campus life and can honor God.
President: Landon Wilson
Nursing Student Association (Not Affiliated with SGA): LUNSA provides the opportunity for professional and interpersonal growth through leadership, philanthropy and service.
Affiliated with School of Nursing
O (Back to Top)
Operation Christmas Child: Our mission is to support Samaritan’s Purse and OCC by hosting a yearly collection drive with thousands of shoeboxes full of toys for kids around the world to hear the gospel.
President: Meghan Johns
Orthodox Christian Fellowship: Orthodox Christian Fellowship (or OCF) strives to be a loving presence of Christ and the Orthodox Christian Church on college campuses. Our meetings are open to all.
President: Maximus Marlowe
P (Back to Top)
Philosophy Club: We provide a friendly atmosphere for philosophy enthusiasts to discuss and enjoy the art and skill of philosophy and Christian philosophy.
President: Elijah Artley
Pi Sigma Alpha Honor Society (Not Affiliated with SGA): Join the only honor society for college and university government students in the United States! We are also a member of the Association of College Honor Societies.
Affiliated with Helms School of Government
Poetic Soul Association: We seek to draw closer to God and help others to do so through fellowship and spreading the Good News through sharing our poetry at events in our local community.
President: Heather Barrett
POV Photography Club: We give students an opportunity to learn more about the growing field of photography in a purposeful manner, while pointing to God’s awesome glory and magnificent grace.
President: Calian Chambers
Powerlifting Club: A group of guys and girls looking to train and get stronger together. We train together twice a week, and a few times a year there are optional competitive powerlifting competitions.
President: Jack Townsend
Pre-Dental Club: We show students the dental profession and inform them on the requirements of dental school. We allow students interested in dentistry to share their passions and glorify God.
President: Samuel Warren
Pre-Law Society: We provide resources and networking to students interested in law. We host speakers and meet for LSAT info sessions, internship workshops, social events, and go on an annual D.C. trip.
President: Rachel Auld
Pre-Medical Club and Honor Society: We prepare students for careers in medicine and the med school application process. We hear from physicians, med school admissions reps, med student panels, and professors.
President: Christi Fertich & Shelby Jampole
Pre-OT Club: We provide resources and speakers for our members to learn about Occupational Therapy and hold events to prepare students for graduate school and their future in OT.
President: Alyssa White
Pre-Physical Therapy: We support students pursuing careers in physical therapy and PT school acceptance. We offer GRE tutoring, guest speakers, resume and PT school application workshops, and more.
President: Heidi Bosch
Pre-Physician’s Assistant Club: We equip students seeking acceptance into Physician Assistant school through academic advice and professional networking in a Christ-centered community.
President: Jenna Digirolamo
Pre-Veterinary Medicine Club: Pre-Vet Club exists to create a community among students interested in veterinary medicine as a career and provide them with resources to help them in the application process.
President: Alexis Ramerth
Psi Chi Honor Society (Not Affiliated with SGA): We are LU’s chapter of the International Honor Society for Psychology.
Affiliated with School of Behavioral Sciences: Psychology
Public Health Student Association: We promote health and wellness, ensure knowledge of career and academic matters related to public health, and develop Christ-centered relationships among students and faculty.
President: Michala Geraty
Public Relations Student Society of America (PRSSA): We allow students in the communications, business, marketing, design, and PR fields to gain experience and knowledge in today’s media-reliant business world.
President: Emma Strudthoff
R (Back to Top)
Ratio Christi (Apologetics Club): We are here to keep students strong in their faith so they can withstand the challenges they face as they go out into the world.
President: Isaac Sutherland
Real Estate Club: We provide opportunities to learn about the real estate field and future careers. Guest speakers will teach members about the various careers within the real estate industry.
President: Brandon Meeks
Reformed University Fellowship: We are a rest stop for tired Christians to rest in the good news of Christ without having to bring anything to the table! We are a safe place for skeptics; anyone is welcome.
President: Julia Washburn
Renewable Energy (Not Affiliated with SGA): We are dedicated to educating students on the unique and interesting world of Renewable Energy Technologies, including Solar, Wind, Geothermal, and Kinetic energy generation.
Affiliated with School of Engineering
Respiratory Therapy Student Association: We unite respiratory therapy students while giving back to our community. We have various projects planned to educate the LU and Lynchburg communities on respiratory care.
President: Pierce Knepley
Robotics Club: A club dedicated to the electro-mechanical and electronics projects. Focuses are on subjects such as rapid prototyping (3D printing, CNC, etc.) and robotics.
President: Caleb Summy
S (Back to Top)
Scientific Research Society: We present ongoing research at monthly meetings, review current scientific literature, and provide information about obtaining research positions at LU and other locations.
President: Jack Gregory
SCUBA Club: To experience God’s creation on a deeper level by enhancing our SCUBA diving skills and encouraging others to do the same.
President: Jimmy Ortiz
Serving Others Using Aviation Resources (SOAR): We expose aspiring aviators to the pilots’ mission field by providing paths for those pursuing missionary aviation and inviting speakers who served in the mission field.
President: Anna McCauley
Sigma Beta Delta Honor Society (Not Affiliated with SGA): We are LU’s chapter of the National Collegiate Hispanic Honor Society. We honor students who demonstrate excellence in studying Spanish.
Affiliated with College of Arts & Sciences: Department of Modern Languages
Sigma Delta Pi – Pi Chi Chapter (Not Affiliated with SGA): We are an honor society for students of business, management, and administration. The principles of the Society are wisdom, honor, and the pursuit of meaningful aspirations.
Affiliated with School of Business
Sigma Tau Delta – Zeta Tau Chapter: We are LU’s chapter of the international English honors society, Sigma Tau Delta. We are dedicated to fostering literacy, community, and all aspects of the English discipline.
President: Katherine Bechter
Social Work Club: We seek to bring unity within the social work department and the LYH community by serving and sharing the Gospel with service projects, fundraisers, and rallies.
President: Teresa Tran
Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM): Our purpose is to glorify God by providing our members with opportunities for professional development as they partner with national SHRM to promote the HR profession.
President: Alexa Honeycutt
Society of Women Engineers: The Society of Women Engineers at Liberty seeks to connect, support, and provide community and resources for women in engineering.
President: Christa Collins
Sports Analytics Club: We apply knowledge in math, stats, data analysis, etc., to sports by maximizing performance and decision-making. We offer practical experiences and promote LU athletic teams.
President: Benjamin Marshall
Stand With Israel: We seek to strengthen the relationship between the US and Israel by involving students in politics. We have debates, guest speakers, petitions, and opportunities to lobby.
Presidents: Talia Silver
Strategic Intelligence Society: We​ ​prepare​ ​students​ ​for​ the​ ​Intel​ ​Community​ by practicing analysis, employing tradecraft techniques, fostering relationships, and studying intel-related fields.​
President: Julianna Vogl
Student Asset Management Fund (SAM Fund) (Not Affiliated with SGA): SAM Fund is a student-led asset management fund that integrates a Christian worldview with practical investment experience.​​
Affiliated with School of Business
Student Association of Project Management: We give you the opportunity to further develop your personal and professional goals. SAPM is dedicated to glorifying God through the development of young project managers.
President: Samuel Alvites
Students Against Trafficking: We seek to prevent and create awareness of exploitation and trafficking by teaching how to recognize and respond to signs of human trafficking and online exploitation.
President: Abby Andrews
Students Behind Our Military: Our purpose is to show the love of Christ by raising awareness and showing appreciation and support to our past and present troops and loved ones throughout the world.
President: Xavier Ward-Cardona
Students Today, Alumni Tomorrow: We foster relationships with Champions for Christ through leadership opportunities, professional development, spirited events, etc. that enhance students’ and alumni’s lives.
President: Sarah Rogen
Student Veterans Association: Embracing the motto Servus Semper or Serve Always; our mission is to serve veterans within the community while fostering a culture of camaraderie & educational success.
President: Logan Smith
T (Back to Top)
T3 (Time, Treasure, Talent): We equip LU’s financial planning majors spiritually, professionally, and intellectually as they pursue careers by hosting panel-style networking events and social gatherings.
President: Emma VanGorder
Turning Point USA: We educate and train students on campus to promote freedom, free market, and limited government.
President: Colin Miley
Type One Diabetes Student Association: We want to connect all LU students who live with Type One Diabetes and establish a community of people ready to assist and support each other should the need arise.
President: Manuel Guzman
U (Back to Top)
Ultrarunning Club: We help runners train for and race ultra-marathon distance events by emphasizing proper fitness techniques, using ministry outreach as runners, and scheduled trail clean-ups.
President: Emma Schmideler
Unify Korea: We are a branch of North Korea Peace Initiative whose goal is to see North and South Korea united. We promote reunification through education, prayer, and mobilization.
President: Megan Chaney
Urban Education Club: We help SOE students experience the teaching challenges in low-income communities. Our goal is for more candidates to pursue careers in urban areas to raise teacher retention.
President: Bethany Peterson
V (Back to Top)
VisionPoint Club: We train and network local pastors globally. We help young men discern and exercise their pastoral calling and display this calling to LU through lives of exemplary service.
President: Layton Moore
Visual & Illustrative Development Association: We help Christian creatives learn and perfect their craft of illustration and visual development to glorify God and to build confidence in the creative industry.
President: Benn Pattera
W (Back to Top)
Women in Aviation: We encourage the promotion of women in the male-dominated industry and help them in the aviation field to spread God’s word and guide the next generation of aviators to Him.
President: Emily Guajardo
Women in Business: We help business students welcome other leaders’ ideas, advance women’s role in the workplace, and grow closer to Christ through speakers, networking, and social events.
President: Zoe Egly
Women in STEM: We provide a space for female students and faculty in STEM to encourage one another by fostering mentorship relationships, hosting speakers, and community service activities.
President: Esther Kamara
Women’s Weight Training: We offer community for women who enjoy weight training as well as a multitude of educational resources focused on health and weight training for beginners to advanced lifters.
President: Cassandra Murchie
Y (Back to Top)
Young Americans for Freedom: The Conservative Movement starts here! Join young activists looking to create lasting freedom principles on campus.
President: Matt Walker
YoungLife: We introduce teens to Jesus and lead them in their faith. Building relationships with teens is central. We train students in this outreach and encourage them in community.
President: Alejandro Quintana
Young Women for America: We lead Christian, conservative women to promote Biblical and conservative principles in our community. We aim to magnify voices, lead a movement, and impact the culture. 
President: Britton Miller
Z (Back to Top)
Zeta Chi International Honorary Art Fraternity (Not Affiliated with SGA): We meet to study, build community, and help students use their artistic interests and influence to support the highest ideals of liberal arts education.
Affiliated with School of Communication and the Arts: Studio and Digital Arts Department
Zumba Club: We provide a space for students to learn Zumba fitness® as an exercise alternative and an opportunity for consistent fellowship and so they can teach others in the future.
President: Ariella Hamilton
For more information about clubs, inquiries about SGA policies, additional club forms, etc., please contact the Clubs Staff."
"https://www.liberty.edu/students/sga/","SGA Pursues One Mission through Three Branches
SGA’s mission is to listen to students’ concerns, collaborate on solutions, and present them to Liberty’s administration to improve Liberty University for everyone.
The Executive Branch of SGA acts as the main representative of the student body's concerns and joys to the administration. Through fun events, engaging social media, and regular student outreach, the Executive Branch ensures that it stays up to date on the student body's most pressing concerns. The Student Body President and Vice President formulate plans and suggestions from these suggestions to take them to key administrators for implementation. The Executive Branch also manages clubs, budgets, and elections to ensure the best student experience at Liberty University.
The Representative Branch of SGA serves as a think tank to brainstorm ideas to make Liberty University a better place. The elected House of Representatives is the body that is the closest to the needs of specific students all across campus and the Lynchburg area, while the Senate represents schools and their deans. The Representative Branch comes up with solutions to problems as small as the need for another bike rack by Montview or as large as the procuring of a multi-million dollar investment. These solutions are introduced into the legislative process, refined, and then presented to administration for approval.
The Judicial Branch of SGA first exists to allow students to voice concerns about traffic and parking citations issued by LUPD. Each year, the Student Court rules on tens of thousands of dollars in citation appeals. The Student Court also serves SGA by mediating disputes between members and answering questions regarding the SGA Constitution. In this way, the Judicial Branch ensures that members' perspectives are heard and allows all of SGA to run smoothly.
House of Representatives Elections
House Representatives are elected at the beginning of the Fall semester and serve in the House of Representatives for the rest of the academic year. One representative is elected per residence hall or building, while commuter representatives are elected by commuter students at-large. House Representatives are responsible for attending biweekly House meetings and biweekly House committee meetings to write, present, and debate legislation for the betterment of Liberty University.
Apply for the House of Representatives!
Get Involved
Below are some of the open positions in the Student Government Association. Find out more about each position and submit an application to work at SGA.
Representative Positions
Senators
Hall Representatives
Commuter Representatives
Senate Staff
Judicial Positions
Associate Justices
Upcoming Club Events
Accounting Society
Across Generations
Association of Students of African Descent
Brazilian Student Association
Cackle Hour
Catholic Campus Ministry
CFAW Events
Criminal Justice Club
Cru at Liberty
Disney Club
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Club
Family and Child Development Association
French Club
Global Studies Club
Hallyu Club
Hans Gross Society
Korean Student Association
Liberty Running Club
Liberty Space
Orthodox Christian Fellowship
Philosophy Club
Poetic Soul Association
Pre-Law Society
SGA Events
Strategic Intelligence Society
Urban Education
Young Life
Young Women for America
✕ Clear Selection 
There are currently no events scheduled.
Connect with SGA
Visit Our Office
Montview, Room 3560
Our newly renovated office is located on the the third floor of Montview on the Liberty Arena side.
Monday–Tuesday, Thursday:
9 a.m. – 10 p.m.
Wednesday, Friday:
9 a.m. – 5 p.m.
Experience SGA
Join us at a…
Senate meeting
House meeting
Tabling location on campus
SGA Launch
SGA is excited to announce the start of our new leadership development program, SGA Launch!
This exciting program, which will be open to members of all SGA branches, will consist of a leadership cohort of twelve emerging leaders. Launch is designed and led by some of SGA’s most experienced leaders. Cohort members will be developed through intentional cohort meetings, personal mentorship opportunities, external speakers, and other beneficial content.
Applications are open until Wednesday, September 13, at noon. Spots are limited and applications are reviewed on a rolling basis, so apply today!
Apply to SGA Launch!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/students/dean/community-life/community-standards/","Community Standards
Overview
The Community Standards process addresses violations of the code of honor in a holistic manner. Once violations have been reviewed, the behavior will be addressed through educational programming, such as Restorative Practices, Pathways, and CHOICES. When necessary, traditional sanctions (as outlined in The Liberty Way) are used.
Though discipline is never easy (Hebrews 12:11), it is biblical (Proverbs 3:11-12, 19; 12:1; 13:24). The Office of Community Life does not look at the Community Standards process as a negative one, but one of restoration (Proverbs 22:15) to be handled in a caring manner (Ephesians 6:4).
Reporting
If you violate a policy of Liberty University, we encourage you to inform your hall leadership and/or our office as soon as possible. If a student you know has committed a violation, we suggest that you address them first. If they will not report the violation themselves, we ask that you email (communitylife@liberty.edu) or call our office at (434) 582-2320, or contact a member of leadership on your hall.
Matthew 18:15-17 provides a godly example of how to handle problems in a relationship between two individuals. Translating this principle to a community relationship, the Resident Assistants, Resident Shepherds, LU Shepherds, Resident Directors, and any member of the Dean of Students Office, among others, represent “a brother or sister.” The goal will be to handle issues quickly and maturely, so verse 17 never becomes an issue. Being open and honest at these times will lead to the most restorative and desired outcome.
Confidential Reporting
At times, anonymous reporting is desired. This may be due to social pressures, fear of retaliation, a lack of trust in the process, or not wanting to get involved. In the Office of Community Life, we offer the option of confidential reporting and will seek to investigate an incident that allegedly occurred without revealing any personally identifying information of the reporting party. If a reporting party wants to maintain anonymity, Community Life will be unable to conduct an investigation or pursue disciplinary action. If you would like more information concerning confidential reporting, please contact the Office of Community Life.
Amnesty
If you fear that due to your involvement in behavior contrary to The Liberty Way (linked), reporting a violation or cooperation with an investigation may lead to personal violations, amnesty may be available. Please review The Liberty Way outlines this process in more detail. You may also call to speak with an Associate Director to better understand the Amnesty Policy.
For clarification of our policies, please email communitylife@liberty.edu and a member of our team will be happy to make sure your questions are answered.
Programs
Substance Abuse Awareness
Develop personal, biblical values regarding substance abuse.
Student Appeals Court
Hears discipline appeals regarding violations against the Student Code of Honor.
Choices
An educational program that teaches wisdom, decision making, and stewardship.
Restorative Practices
Restorative Practices builds awareness of your behavior’s impact on the community and provides accountability.
Disciplinary Record
Review your full disciplinary history below.
View Disciplinary Record"
"https://www.liberty.edu/students/health-wellness/","Student Health and Wellness
Contact
Office in Commons 3
(434) 592-7770
M-F, 8 a.m.–5 p.m.
Listen to our podcast: Challenging Your Health Mindset
Be empowered to change your health mindset. Listen as our Executive Director, Dr. Keith R. Anderson discusses the 9 dimensions of wellness with diverse guests who provide thought-provoking perspectives on holistic wellness topics.
Social Media Connections
Here’s how you can stay up to date on all that’s happening with Liberty University’s Student Health Center and Wellness Initiatives Department. Follow us on your favorite social media platform."
"https://www.liberty.edu/students/student-counseling/","Student Counseling Services
We’re Here to Help
Student Counseling Services is now Counseling and Psychological Services (CAPS).
Access our new website at https://www.lustudentcounseling.com/
Office Hours
Green Hall, Room 1830
Monday–Friday*
8 a.m. – 4:30 p.m.
*Closed 9 am. – 12 p.m on Wednesdays
Our schedule is modified during summer months and semester breaks."
"https://www.liberty.edu/students/","It is our goal to meet your needs in your academics, campus community, and spiritual life. Opportunities for student leadership and assistance with decision-making are some of the ways we encourage and assist you in being prepared for life after graduation.
Meet the Senior Vice President for Student Affairs
Centers & Offices
Dean of Students 
Academic Integrity
CARE and Support
Community Life
Educational Programming
Office of Student Life 
Commuter Student Life
Graduate Student Life
Online Student Life
Residence Life
Student Counseling Services (Now CAPS)
Student Health Center and Wellness Initiatives 
Live Healthy Liberty
Student Health Center
Student Health Records
ROTC
Air Force
Army
Student Resources
Honor Code
The Liberty Way (Student Honor Code)
Off-Campus Living Guide
Hazing Prevention & Report
Hazing Misconduct Report
Hazing Prevention
Get Involved
Clubs and Organizations
Campus Recreation
Live Healthy Liberty
Student Government Association (SGA)
Join an Online Community
Contact
Dr. Mark Hine
Senior Vice President for Student Affairs
svpstudentaffairs@liberty.edu
Green Hall, Room 2750
Executive Suite"
"https://www.liberty.edu/campusrec/lahaye-rec-and-fitness/","Membership Portal
LaHaye Recreation & Fitness Center is a 162,000 square foot multi-functional facility open to Liberty University students, faculty, and staff. Regardless of how you choose to get active—LaHaye Rec & Fit has something for you!
Group Exercise
Join us for 35+ strength, mind/body, cardio, or combination Group Ex classes. Not enough variety? Purchase a Group Ex Plus Membership to access 70+ classes a semester!
Learn More
Rock Climbing
The LaHaye Rock Wall is a great opportunity for students to build strength, courage, and community. The LaHaye Rock Wall is a 4,000 square foot climbing facility offering bouldering, a climbing tower, and a variety of programming.
Learn More
Aquatics
The LaHaye Aquatic Center houses six 25-yard lanes, one 1 meter diving board, and 2 spas. The Aquatic Center is currently open for lap swimming and offers a variety of programming.
Learn More
Personal Training
Train with our fitness professionals to achieve your personal fitness goals.
Learn More
Membership Opportunities
LaHaye Rec & Fit offers a variety of membership opportunities for those affiliated with Liberty University.
Learn More 
Athletic Training
LaHaye Rec & Fit houses an athletic training room specifically for those injured within Campus Recreation facilities or while participating in Intramural Sports.
Learn More"
"https://www.liberty.edu/campusrec/hydaway-outdoor-center/","Hydaway Outdoor Center
Fun. Challenge. Adventure. Take a break from your studies and enjoy all that Liberty University has to offer—outdoors! Camp, kayak, and even fish at the Hydaway Outdoor Center located less than 5 miles from the Liberty University campus. Run, hike, or bike on our expansive trail system. In the mood for adventure? Take a short getaway with us on one of our guided outdoor trips or compete in one of our trail races.
Liberty Mountain Trail Series
Take the challenge and run in the Liberty Mountain Trail Series. Races are held in both fall and spring semesters on the Liberty Mountain Trail System. Run our half-marathon, 5-mile, 2-mile, and 5k courses or our 1-mile uphill sprint.
Info & Registration
Outdoor Adventure
Adventure with us on an outdoor trip guided by our experienced trip leaders. Trips include horseback riding, kayaking, hiking, whitewater rafting, camping, skiing, fly fi­shing, and rappelling.
Upcoming Trips
Workshops
Interested in getting certified in Wilderness First Aid? Want to learn more about backcountry cooking? Sign-up for one of our workshops this semester!
Upcoming Workshops"
"https://www.liberty.edu/campusrec/snowflex/","Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre
Activity Pricing
Snowflex specializes in year-round mountain activities open to Liberty University students, faculty, staff, and the general public. Blast down one of our Neveplast tubing runs or ski in all four seasons on our Snowflex slopes. The reservable Barrick-Falwell Lodge is Liberty Mountain’s scenic centerpiece, giving the Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre the look and feel of an alpine resort. Snowflex also offers one of the prettiest sunset views around, so even if you’re not a fan of snow sports, come on up and enjoy the view!
Please note: liability forms are required for all activities and can be found in the quick links section. Tubing is a weather-dependent activity. Please call ahead to verify tubing is available if Lynchburg is experiencing inclement weather.
Artificial Slopes
Briton Engineering’s patented Snowflex® surface is recognized as the closest replication of snow and makes it possible to participate in skiing and snowboarding year-round! Our slopes feature various terrain park features for experienced riders and have multiple access points.
Rentals & Lessons
We offer all rental equipment needed to ski, snowboard, sled, or tube, so you don’t need to worry about bringing your own! If you have never tried a snow-sport before, we highly recommend working with one of our instructors to schedule a lesson and learn the basics before you ride. 
Tubing Runs
Snowflex operates two Neveplast tubing runs with year-round tubing options for everyone! All of our tubing runs are a safe, fun, and inexpensive way to enjoy the scenic campus of Liberty University and the Blue Ridge Mountains in all four seasons.
Sledding
In addition to our main slope, we offer a Bunny Hill and designated sledding area designed with Snowflex® surface. This activity is perfect for younger children.
Olympic-Grade Trampoline
Bounce around for fun or work on aerial awareness for freestyle on our Olympic-grade trampoline. Whether you want to jump on your own or rent our trampoline snowboards/skiis, our trampoline is fun for all ages!
Barrick-Falwell Lodge
The Barrick-Falwell Lodge offers spacious seating for students to utilize as study space or for parents to stay warm during their child’s lesson! The lodge is housed with a concessions stand and Pro Shop featuring Liberty Snowflex merchandise such as t-shirts, sweatshirts, mugs, and more (Flames Cash accepted).
The lodge is also available for reservations by Liberty and local community members for business meetings, personal parties, and more!
Learn More"
"https://www.liberty.edu/campusrec/student-activities/","Late Skate
Friday, September 8, 2023 | 9:00 pm | LaHaye Ice Center
See Details
Open Mic
Tuesday, September 12, 2023 | 7:00 pm | Academic Lawn
See Details
Neon Mini Golf
Friday, September 15, 2023 | 8:00 pm | School of Divinity Lawn
See Details
Outdoor Movie Night: Across the Spider-verse
Saturday, September 16, 2023 | 8:00 pm | Academic Lawn
See Details
Photo Expo
Monday, September 18, 2023 | 8:00 am | LaHaye Lobby
See Details"
"https://www.liberty.edu/about/contact-liberty-university/","Liberty Online
Residential"
"https://www.liberty.edu/prechatform/?dept=Residential","We're sorry we missed you! Our offices are currently closed. Please see below for office hours and additional contact information.
residential graduate Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat: 10:00AM - 6:00PM EST
Sun: Closed
Our Admissions Office is available by phone at (877) 298-9617, Mon, Tues, Thurs, and Fri from 10:00AM to 9:00PM EST, Wed from 9:00AM to 6:00PM EST, and Sat 10:00AM to 6:00PM EST. You can also email us at residentgraduate@liberty.edu.
residential undergrad Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat: 10:00AM - 6:00PM EST
Sun: Closed
Our Admissions Office is available by phone at (800) 543-5317, Mon, Tues, Thurs, and Fri from 10:00AM to 9:00PM EST, Wed from 9:00AM to 6:00PM EST, and Sat 10:00AM to 6:00PM EST. You can also email us at admissions@liberty.edu.
residential international Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat & Sun: Closed
student advocate office Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 12:00PM EST
Mon - Fri: 12:30PM - 4:25PM EST
Sat & Sun: Closed
Student Advocate Office is now closed. We are unable to accept your chat at this time, however send us an email (sao@liberty.edu) and we will respond when our office reopens. 
luo undergrad admissions Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat: 10:00AM - 6:00PM EST
Sun: Closed
Our Admissions Office is available by phone at (800) 424-9595, Mon, Tues, Thurs, and Fri from 8:00AM to 8:00PM EST, Wed from 8:00AM to 6:00PM EST, and Sat 10:00AM to 6:00PM EST. You can also email us at LUOUndergrad@liberty.edu.
luo graduate admissions Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat: 10:00AM - 6:00PM EST
Sun: Closed
Our Admissions Office is available by phone at (800) 424-9595, Mon, Tues, Thurs, and Fri from 8:00AM to 8:00PM EST, Wed from 8:00AM to 6:00PM EST, and Sat 10:00AM to 6:00PM EST. You can also email us at LUOGrad@liberty.edu.
luo advising Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat: 10:00AM - 6:00PM EST
Sun: Closed
Our Advising Office is available by phone at (800) 424-9595, Mon, Tues, Thurs, and Fri from 8:00AM to 8:00PM EST, Wed from 8:00AM to 6:00PM EST, and Sat 10:00AM to 6:00PM EST. You can also email us at LUOAdvising@liberty.edu.
financial aid Hours:
Mon, Wed, Tue, Thu, Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat: 10:00AM - 6:00PM EST
Sun: Closed
military affairs Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat: 10:00AM - 6:00PM EST
Sun: Closed
student accounts Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat: 10:00AM - 6:00PM EST
Sun: Closed
lu serve Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:30AM - 4:30PM EST
Sat & Sun: Closed
id & campus services Hours:
Mon - Fri: 9:00AM - 4:00PM EST
Sat & Sun: Closed
Back to Contacts"
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/2023/08/30/my-friend-barista-goes-viral-as-she-serves-up-coffee-and-the-joy-of-the-lord/","August 30, 2023 : By Ryan Klinker - Office of Communications & Public Engagement 
Caitlin Campbell (’19) 
When she opens up the window to her Street Brew Coffee trailer in her hometown of Toronto, Ontario, Liberty University graduate Caitlin Campbell (’19) is ready to share more than that morning’s dose of caffeine. With a cheerful greeting of “Hello, my friend” to every customer, she passes along the love of God as she passes the cups across the counter.
But she’s not just a friendly face in Toronto; her social media videos showing these daily interactions with customers have made her a familiar face to followers across the world. Her videos have recently gone viral, leading to 1.1 million followers on her TikTok account and over 276,000 on YouTube and 59,000 on Instagram. The Canadian headquarters of TikTok, Google, and Facebook have all invited her for a visit. Almost every morning, Campbell livestreams from her trailer as she serves her customers or makes a cup to feed her own fervent coffee appetite.
“Every day I wake up with one goal in mind, and that’s to spread some joy and positivity and make someone smile,” Campbell said. “Pretty much my entire life I’ve been told by people about how naturally happy and joyful I am, and how I have that sort of presence, and I don’t think I really realized that until recently when I started my business and was able to share my joy with people. It really is the joy of the Lord that I have inside of me, it’s ingrained in me, and getting to spread that is one of my biggest purposes. I truly believe that’s who I am and why God has put me here on this earth.”
The idea of running a coffee business had been brewing for years. She didn’t realize it at the time, but her plan began to take shape when she was a Master of Divinity student at Liberty. While writing a paper about nonprofit work, she outlined a business model for a coffee company that would help the homeless population. She said her professor, Dr. Tim Chang, encouraged her to make it a reality.
“I pretty much wrote a full business plan and was really passionate about it,” Campbell recalled. “At first, my professor thought the company already existed, and he told me, ‘You need to go work at this company; I can clearly see how much you care about it, and I think it’s something you need to pursue.’ At the time I wasn’t sure if I would do it, but what he said stuck with me.”
She also didn’t know at the time how God would use a setback in her life to develop the endurance, fortitude, and an upbeat outlook on life that would serve her well in her current endeavors.
While working as an assistant coach with the Lady Flames Division II hockey team in 2016, she slipped on the ice and fractured her skull. Even though she was promptly treated, Campbell struggled for the rest of the semester with constant headaches, dizziness, and sleep issues. It was eventually determined that she had suffered severe brain trauma from the accident. She moved back home for treatment in February 2017 but returned for the fall semester, pushing through to ultimately graduate on time in May 2019. (Liberty’s news team told her story in a special graduate feature.)
Campbell said she continues to have chronic migraines and some hazy “bad brain days” from the accident, but she is grateful for the Lord’s work in her life.
“I think it instilled a quiet confidence in me that I can overcome almost anything that is thrown my way with the support of my family and the Lord,” Campbell said. “It taught me about the importance of adapting; that things are going to come your way and you have to change. It’s not going to be easy, but you have to take it one step at a time and keep rocking through it.”
After graduating and making plans to attend Dallas Theological Seminary in preparation to become a youth pastor, Campbell decided to return to the coffee concept. She created Street Brew Coffee on Oct. 3, 2019 and for the next several months sold packaged coffee grounds from her booth at local fairs and trade shows.
When the COVID-19 pandemic and travel restrictions caused her to put aside her plans in Dallas, she continued to sell coffee through her online storefront. That’s when she picked up her smartphone and started to share about herself and Street Brew on TikTok. Her friendly demeanor shone through in her videos, instantly attracting fans — and customers. In 2021, she purchased a trailer and took her business out into the Toronto area, where she now sets up shop at farmer’s markets, weddings, festivals, and other events.
“I think a lot of it comes down to my content being authentic and genuine,” she said. “Yes, I own a coffee company and want people to come to the trailer for coffee, but I’m not trying to sell people on anything beyond that. I’m putting myself out there, and I want to build up and encourage others in any way I can. There are a lot of lonely, hurting people out there, and I think they see the positivity and decide to follow it.”
Staying true to the original dream she had while studying at Liberty, Campbell donates a part of Street Brew’s profits to local charities that serve the homeless population.
“We didn’t want to be just another coffee company, even though our coffee is very good; we wanted to be good coffee that does good in the community,” she said. “Not only do the consumers get to have a great cup of coffee, but they also get to know that their dollars are going back into the community.”
And she hopes to take it one step further.
“Our long-term goal is to open up a café and employ people who want to transition out of homelessness,” she said. “A lot of them are just one chance away from changing their lives, so that would give them an opportunity.”
Campbell said her time at Liberty helped to spark the fire that now allows her to shine for the Lord through Street Brew.
“I’d describe it as the biggest growing season of my life,” she said. “In my last year at Liberty (after the injury), I feel like I grew leaps and bounds in my faith and my confidence. My professors were amazing, they set me up to succeed in every way they possibly could, and I felt so confident in who God had made me. I obviously still have a long way to go, but my skills and growth I gained at Liberty have translated into what I do today. I left Liberty with a fire to accomplish my dreams and do whatever I had to do next.”"
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/2023/09/06/safe-supportive-neutral-libertys-office-of-equity-and-compliance-stands-ready-to-serve/","September 6, 2023 : By Office of Communications & Public Engagement 
As Liberty University’s Office of Equity and Compliance (OEC) welcomed students back to campus this fall, the planning and preparation has focused on a continuation of successful current campuswide initiatives as well as improved efforts to keep the Liberty community safe, aware, and well-informed.
The OEC plays a vital role in supporting student success. The office is responsible for administering compliance with the university’s Sexual Misconduct/Title IX Policy, the Non-Discrimination and Equal Opportunity Policy, and the Jeanne Clery Act, which includes the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA).
Recruiting qualified, experienced, and intentional staff members who are passionate about their work in serving the student body has been at the forefront of the office’s efforts. Earlier this year, the OEC welcomed a new Title IX coordinator, Nathan Friesema, who came to Liberty after working in residence life departments at other universities, as well as three new investigators. Last spring, the office moved to its new location in DeMoss Hall 1232, in an area of main campus readily accessible to students. The office now consists of six investigators, three Clery officers, a case manager, and an education team that communicates the office’s purpose and policies to students in addition to training students and staff. Three of the investigators come from a law enforcement background, and the other staff members bring experience in student services, broadcasting, and legal affairs.
“Our tagline is ‘Safe, Supportive, Neutral,’ and that’s directed at the students to let them know that it’s a safe place to talk about our policies,” said investigator Dave Sparnroft, who joined the OEC in March after working in law enforcement. “Sexual misconduct, nondiscrimination, and the other issues we help with are very delicate topics, and for the people who are facing that it can be traumatic, so we want them to know that this is a safe space to talk about it and that we’re here to support them and remain neutral through the process. Like everyone else who works at Liberty, we are here to help our students be successful in college and succeed in their careers out in the world.”
Clery officer Christopher Shirley, a former police officer, said his role is to make sure that the university is complying federally with the Clery Act, which requires colleges and universities to report campus crime data, support victims of violence, and publicly outline the policies and procedures they have put into place to improve campus safety.
“Our purpose is providing transparency to crimes and major incidents that happen on campus or the surrounding area, and we make sure that reports are read and classified correctly so that our statistics are accurate,” Shirley said.
Friesema and his staff said they are constantly working to educate students on the resources available to them and the ease of process for reporting to their office.
They also aim to dispel misconceptions, such as the idea that reporting to the Title IX office subjects students to citations for violating The Liberty Way (Liberty’s student conduct policy). The office gives students amnesty to provide the full truth in reports.
“They should not feel held back from reporting anything out of fear of those repercussions,” Sparnroft said. “Title IX exists to keep students safe and give students and their parents peace of mind in knowing that they are safe and are being taken care of.”
Title IX investigators are separate entities from the Liberty University Police Department (LUPD), meaning that students filing a report are not pushed into pressing charges if they do not wish to.
“We continue to market our office and the services we provide to students in terms of supportive measures and resources, but also the ability to have your complaints or concerns addressed,” Friesema said. “Whether or not students want to work with the police, our office has a process available to them that seeks justice, restitution, or restoration. We want to be able to provide students the safe campus that they deserve.”
The investigators who have law enforcement experience are still able to apply their training in helpful ways.
“Our previous experience in law enforcement has helped us sharpen our investigative skills and inform the questions that we know to ask, and it also gives us a caring approach when talking to people who are in crisis,” investigator Brittany Hall said. “We’ve all had crisis intervention training, and that’s an important piece of it too.”
This year, the OEC has continued its “Speak Up” campaign that encourages students to do exactly that — speak up when they experience or witness behavior or misconduct that potentially violates Title IX policies. “Speak Up” signs with contact information for the office are posted throughout campus on doors in residence halls, television screens, campus buses, and many other visible locations.
Even if someone presents an issue that is not applicable to OEC, Hall explained, the staff will help point people in the right direction. In the end, she said filing a report that does not end up in a Title IX case is better than not reporting at all.
“We want to encourage people to err on the side of caution and report and come talk to us. Even if it doesn’t necessarily fit into what our office does, we can help point people in the right direction. We would rather report and not have anything come from it than have someone not report it and have (violations) continue.”
Members of the OEC education team met with students at the Block Party on Aug. 26, at the end of the first full week of classes. They also maintain a presence on Facebook and Instagram to keep students and the Liberty community informed on current policies and news regarding Title IX.
To learn more about the Office of Equity and Compliance, visit Liberty.edu/Title-IX."
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/2023/09/01/nbas-jonathan-isaac-recounts-decision-to-stand-up-for-his-faith-charges-liberty-students-to-do-the-same/","September 1, 2023 : By Ryan Klinker - Office of Communications & Public Engagement 
(Photo by Jessie Jordan) 
Orlando Magic forward Jonathan Isaac used the Convocation stage Friday morning at Liberty University to share his story of how God has transformed his life and career into a journey of standing boldly for Him and pursuing His purpose, even when others may encourage the opposite.
Isaac acknowledged that many likely know him as the first player to stand during the national anthem in the NBA bubble in 2020, a decision that was followed by support from some and backlash from others. Dealing with an injury at the time, Isaac was still with his team as they entered into the bubble (a COVID-19 quarantine for players to continue their season despite the pandemic). Following the death of George Floyd, teams across the league were kneeling during the national anthem and wearing Black Lives Matter T-shirts, and the Orlando Magic were no different. Every time the topic was brought up, Isaac said he would insert Jesus into the conversation, but he was repeatedly told, “This is not the time for that.”
In a team-only meeting, all of Isaac’s teammates saw no alternative to the decision to wear the shirts and kneel for the anthem. When asked if he would participate, Isaac told his team that he saw the movement differently.
“I found myself in this moment not really understanding my place in it,” he said. “I started to explain to them, ‘I see the problem, I just have a different solution. We all fall short of God’s glory, and I don’t want to point fingers at an individual person — or an entire race for that matter — because I need grace and mercy just like (everyone does).’”
That night, he called his pastor and explained his concerns about taking this stand for his views; Isaac said his peers would denigrate him, the public would tear him down, he would lose out on other opportunities. His pastor simply told him, “You cannot stand for God and God not stand for you.”
At the next game, Isaac did just that. He stood for the national anthem and did not wear the shirt, making national headlines and getting “plastered” online.
“The heartbeat of what I was trying to do was (share) that I believe that we all fall short of God’s glory, and if any of us are throwing stones at any person or anything, we are throwing stones in a glass house,” he said. “If we would love each other the way that God loves us, which is in spite of our sins and shortcomings, there could be real change between white and black people, for all people.”
(Photo by Chase Gyles) 
“The reality of what I’m talking about this morning is that I am the unlikely person; I’m the unlikely person to stand, I’m the unlikely person to get up on this stage and talk to you because of my background and journey,” he added.
Born in The Bronx, Isaac moved to Naples, Fla., in middle school, and he struggled to fit in due to standing out as a tall, black student among mostly white classmates. He developed anxiety, which would continue into his college career and early NBA years. Middle school was also when Isaac began playing basketball at a high level, and he formed his sense of self by his status on the court.
“I put everything that I had into creating this identity as a basketball player, to the point that I was the No. 1 player in the state of Florida, but what nobody knew was that I was struggling so much behind the scenes with anxiety,” Isaac said. “This thing on the inside of me was growing. The more and more people expected of me, the higher I got as a basketball player, I was having this dichotomy of working so hard for love and trying so hard not to lose it by playing badly.”
“For me, it speaks to the reality of having a relationship with Jesus Christ,” he added. “Finding my identity, my strength, my confidence, my purpose, and my trust in Him, and allowing Him to lead my life for moments like the bubble, moments that I’m known for.”
Isaac grew up in church, but he didn’t have a relationship with Christ when he entered the NBA in 2017; he said he was living for himself. As a rookie, one of his teammates invited him to a chapel, and the chaplain started the message with Luke 6:46, which says, “Why do you call me Lord and not do what I say?” Isaac felt convicted, but he didn’t fully change. Through the persistence of Christians around him who sought after him, Isaac eventually found a new purpose: the one God has for him.
Students were able to meet Isaac after Convocation. (Photo by Chase Gyles) 
“I was so used to working for love, I was so used to clinging to the perception that other people had of me and striving to be loved, (but) I started to rest in the love that God has for me. The reality of a transformational relationship with Jesus Christ is real, and I know that because I’ve lived it and I’m walking through it. I’ve had so many ups and downs, I’ve been injured, I’ve trusted God, I’ve walked with God, and there are a few things I know to be true. I know that the world is changing, and the necessity of you being able to stand up for your faith is only going to become more paramount, (yet) harder to do.”
He charged the students of Liberty University to stand up in their own ways.
“God is trying to equip each and every one of you with purpose, and you’re going to carry out something for the Kingdom of God. It’s going to be a stand in one way or another, if it’s before the Lord or in your everyday life, and you’re going to have to do it or you will not be who God has created you to be.”
After Convocation, Isaac said he hoped that the students will take his words to heart, and he explained why he wanted to visit Liberty.
Isaac met with members of Liberty’s women’s basketball team. (Photo by Chase Gyles) 
“I hope that they’ve been encouraged to stand up for what they believe in and understand that God can, and will, use anybody who is willing, no matter what you struggles are or your background. Coming to a Christian college was important to me because this is the body (of Christ), and so having the students be able to hear my story and take something away from it is important. Them being planted here and having this community is so special.”
“I thought it was so cool that he stood for his faith and that, whenever people were hating on him and his decision, he kept standing for what was right,” said freshman Hayden Hyman.
Isaac took time to take photos with the women’s basketball team and some students after Convocation, and he is scheduled to meet with the men’s team on Saturday.
Prior to Isaac’s speech, Flames Football Head Coach Jamey Chadwell was accompanied by the drum line of The Spirit of the Mountain marching band as they encouraged students to attend the Flames’ home opener against Bowling Green, which kicks off Saturday at noon."
"https://www.liberty.edu/police/emergency-information/","Emergency Information
LU Emergency Notifications
In the event of an emergency, you will be notified by:
Text and email (if signed up for campus alerts)
Outdoor sirens of the Liberty University Emergency Warning System
Announcement on myLU
Announcement on The Journey radio 88.3 FM
A second notice will be distributed when safety has been restored.
Report an Emergency
Dial 3911 from any Liberty University phone or (434) 592-3911 from any cell or off-campus phone.
Add this number to your phone with the area code to save time during an emergency.
What to Do in an Emergency
The Emergency Management & Community Engagement Department has resources to help you navigate a variety of hazards and emergencies.
Emergency Plans – know what to do when unexpected weather or emergency events happen
Emergency & Safety Training courses – empower yourself with the knowledge to stay safe
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
Have You Witnessed or Been the Victim of a Crime?
If so, then it is important to know what rights and what resources are available to you. The LUPD Victim/Witness Information Form was created to do just that. Take the time to read and understand the information on this form. You are not alone!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/2023/09/06/former-country-music-artist-granger-smith-rejects-cultural-christianity-to-find-true-joy-in-christ/","September 6, 2023 : By Christian Shields - Office of Communications & Public Engagement 
Liberty University welcomed minister and former country music artist Granger Smith to Convocation on Wednesday to preach on the importance of denying oneself for Christ.
Smith, who performed his last concert on Aug. 26, spent 24 years touring before feeling called to leave behind country music to serve at his local church outside Austin, Texas. He is also an accomplished author and released his second book, “Like a River,” in August.
Smith began his message by telling the audience that he had been looking forward to speaking on Liberty’s campus.
“I understand the speakers are brought here to maybe bring an encouraging word or a little conviction, and I want you to know that you have already been that for me,” Smith said.
Reading from Mark 8:34-36, he spoke about the large role that sacrifice and “taking up the cross” plays in following God. He said sacrifice alone is not the means of one’s salvation, but instead the result of the work that God has already done.
“When Jesus said, ‘Deny yourself, take up your cross and follow me,’ in one sense He’s identifying a certain kind of person that can do that … not a person that has earned it, but a person that has died and then been reborn.”
In a similar vein, Smith noted that although the imagery of picking up a cross, an ancient form of execution, may not sound easy or enjoyable, following Christ is worth it.
Smith said he grew up in a Christian family but never learned to truly deny himself. He spent this time living in what he called “cultural Christianity,” in which he lived a comfortable life and eventually emerged on the country music scene. He found major success and attributed it to his own efforts instead of the grace of God.
Former country music artist Granger Smith spoke on living a life of sacrifice at Convocation. (Photo by Brooke McDuffee) 
“Who gets the credit in your life?” Smith asked the audience. “I’m not asking for your culturally Christian influence to answer; I’m asking your heart. Why are you seeking the degree that you’re studying for right now? And for whose glory will you use it?”
Smith’s life drastically changed in 2019 with the death of his 3-year-old son, River, a point at which he “hit rock bottom.”
“When you hold a lifeless child in your arms, one that you love more than most things in this world, it will change you. You will question how much control you really have in your life,” he said.
Following the tragedy, Smith began searching for comfort many different places, including self-help books, devotionals, medication, therapy, and meditation. He finally found the answer while listening to a sermon on John 14 in his truck, and he was filled with a desire to pursue Christ and obey His commandments.
“It doesn’t take a lot of complex theology to say it this way: I like denying myself for His sake. That’s the difference between the old me and the new me,” Smith said. “Denying yourself as a Christian doesn’t mean forcing yourself to do things that you hate. It’s the opposite.”
In 2021, he put began acting on this conviction by leaving his successful record label, and he later decided to leave country music completely with one last tour over the summer. Addressing the question of why he could not just use his music as a means to share the Gospel, Smith said that playing music had become too much about his own glory.
“If I walked on stage playing music and nobody sings and nobody shows up, I would take that personally,” he said. “It’s about exalting myself then, and I need to deny that. Exalting myself doesn’t reconcile with the Gospel.”
(Photo by Chase Gyles) 
“Many times, as Christians we have to give up things that aren’t inherently bad themselves. Music touring is not a sin in itself,” he added. “Neither is social media, caffeine, alcohol, or college football, but anything can become sin when it starts to hinder our walk with Jesus. So, we have to surrender that. That’s part of what it means to ‘deny yourself.’”
As Smith prepared to walk on stage for the last time as a country singer in August, he said he found comfort in the phrase, “Sept. 6, Liberty University,” because it signified the start of a new chapter in his life.
“(Liberty is) the first stage of the new stages in my life. This stage, this day, the phrase represented a sunrise of a new day and a new beginning,” he said. “(It was) something that gave me so much rest. Denying yourself for Christ is not a burden. It’s peace.”
Smith concluded his message by harkening back to the joy that he has found in sacrificing for Christ and comparing his life to that of the man in Matthew 13:44 who sold everything to attain hidden treasure.
“Following Jesus requires sacrifice,” Smith said. “It requires suffering. You will have sorrow, pain, temptation, and grief. In this world you’ll have tribulation, but take heart, Christian, because Jesus has overcome the world so that you could have joy through all of it, even after the unimaginable pain of losing a child.”
“Denying yourself, taking up your cross, and following Jesus is not at odds with your joy but in fact is the source of it,” he added. “Nothing in this world can satisfy you with the fullness of joy like Christ alone.”"
"https://www.liberty.edu/offices/privacy-policy/","Privacy Policy
Liberty University collects various types of information through our sites and other websites where you express interest in our services, as well as through our mobile applications, via email, Live Chat over the phone, via printed forms and in person. Some information is collected automatically through various web and Internet technologies including social networking tools used by the University. Other information is collected when provided to us voluntarily.
We may also obtain information from education partners, business associates, and unrelated entities and combine it with information we collect.
This is a summary of Liberty University’s Privacy Policy. View the full privacy policy."
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/2023/08/16/welcome-to-lu-its-game-on-for-new-students-on-move-in-day/","August 16, 2023 : By Christian Shields - Office of Communications & Public Engagement 
As Liberty University began welcoming incoming students to campus on Wednesday morning, the newcomers echoed a common theme in their hopes for college life: establishing community.
President Maj. Gen. (Ret.) Dondi E. Costin, Ph.D. and his wife Vickey, alongside Chancellor Jonathan Falwell and his wife Shari greet new students and their families. (Photo by Joel Coleman) 
This community was seen firsthand on move-in day when student leadership teams cheered enthusiastically for families as they drove up to the residence halls and immediately sprung into action to haul students’ belongings to their rooms, to the surprise of the parents.
“I absolutely love the community, how kind people are, how Christ-centered it is. It’s amazing,” said freshman Allison Davis as she moved into her new home in Commons I.
Davis, originally from New York, plans to study music education in Liberty’s School of Music. She said she was originally hesitant to leave for college, but these feelings were eased once she arrived.
“As soon as I stepped on campus, I knew this was where God was calling me,” she said.
Freshman Miranda Fischer from Prince George, Va., said she looks forward to building new friendships. She plans to study nursing and decided to attend Liberty because she wants to grow in her relationship with Christ.
“I’ve been growing in my faith a lot lately, so I definitely feel like coming to Liberty was one of the best decisions for me because it is a Christian school, and I know that this is the next step to growing in my faith.”
While move-in Day is in many ways an exciting time for students, it can also be difficult a time for parents leaving their children in the care of others. Amy Davis traveled from Chicago to drop off her son Rylan so he can pursue a degree in the School of Business.
President Costin and his wife, Vickey, help carry students’ luggage. (Photo by Joel Coleman) 
“We are definitely excited because we feel so comfortable leaving (Rylan) here and (know) that he’s in a safe place,” she said. “He is going to deepen his faith and he has two of his best friends here, so that makes us really comfortable. The hard part is he’s 12 hours from home. We won’t be seeing him very often, but it’s hard not to be excited for him.”
Among the crowds greeting the new students and comforting their families were newly appointed Liberty President Maj. Gen. (Ret.) Dondi E. Costin, Ph.D., and his wife, Vickey, and Chancellor Jonathan Falwell and his wife, Shari.
President Costin said he relishes move-in day as it presents an opportunity to speak with new students about their future plans.
“It’s like pregame jitters a little bit, a little bit of butterflies, but we’re just really excited,” said Costin, who officially stepped into his new role on July 1. “We’ve been praying for them and cheering for them. And to see the parents, grandparents, and others dropping them off is mixed emotions. Generally, the kids are really excited, and the moms and dads drive away crying. But that’s what it’s all about; they’ve done their job to prepare them for this day, and now it’s our job. I refer to students as ‘Liberty’s precious cargo’ who have been raised up by these parents. I’m just very excited that today it’s ‘game on.’”
“I’ve been around here since Day 1,” said Falwell, whose father Dr. Jerry Falwell founded the university in 1971. “I remember when this was a farm, and so to be able to see the thousands of students and to see where it came from to where it is today, it’s overwhelming to see what God continues to do on this campus. Thinking back to what my dad said all those years ago about what this place would one day be, to now actually see where it is and everything he said is there, for me it’s a pretty cool time to recognize the faithfulness of God.”
President Costin and his wife Vickey help new students move in. (Photo by Joel Coleman) 
With the increased focus that Liberty places on ensuring that students are developing spiritually as well as academically, Falwell noted that every one of the 16,000 students on campus has the potential to do great things for the Gospel.
“(Liberty’s) an amazing place, and I know that every student is going to be blown away by what God does in their life, if they will let Him do it,” he said.
Liberty plans a full Welcome Week of activities for new students, starting with a New Student Convocation on Friday where students will hear from President Costin. Parents of new students are invited to a Family & Parent Session on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons in the Center for Music and the Worship Arts, Concert Hall.
New student move-in continues on Thursday; residence halls will open for returning students on Friday. Classes begin on Aug. 21.
Students will celebrate the start of a new year at the annual Block Party, hosted by the Student Activities Department, on Aug. 26.
(Photo by Joel Coleman) (Photo by Joel Coleman) President Costin and his wife, Vickey, and Chancellor Falwell and his wife, Shari, welcome incoming students alongside Liberty’s student leadership teams. (Photo by Joel Coleman) Student leadership on Commons III welcome incoming students. (Photo by Brooke McDuffee) (Photo by Brooke McDuffee) President Costin and Chancellor Falwell with one of the university’s resident directors and his family. (Photo by Joel Coleman)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/2023/09/01/leadership-success-and-proclaiming-christ-in-higher-education-a-chat-with-liberty-university-president-dondi-costin/","September 1, 2023 : By Office of Communications & Public Engagement 
It has been two months since Dr. Dondi E. Costin assumed his role as president of Liberty University, and he has already made his vision and presence clear for all to see. Seeking to build upon the work of founder Dr. Jerry Falwell and those after him who have joined God in His work on Liberty Mountain, Costin views his presidency as an opportunity to further the university’s distinct Christian mission while addressing the challenges of operating one of the world’s largest Christian universities head-on. Ever since students returned for the fall semester and campus has gotten back to buzzing, Costin has attended countless events both formally and casually to meet the Liberty community face-to-face.
President Costin recently sat down for an extended interview with Ryan Helfenbein, Liberty’s Vice President of Communications & Public Engagement, to discuss his philosophy as a leader, Liberty’s role in the evolving climate of higher education, goals for reaching the current student body’s generation, and the ultimate goal of sending forth Champions for Christ into the world with each coming year.
Maj. Gen. (Ret.) Dondi E. Costin, Ph.D., came to Liberty as a continuation of a lifetime dedicated to service. Most recently, Costin served as president of Charleston Southern University (CSU), preceded by 32 years of commissioned service in the U.S. Air Force, during which he represented the Liberty Baptist Fellowship as an endorsed chaplain. He completed his military career at the Pentagon as Air Force Chief of Chaplains.
[Listen to Costin share his faith journey]
Liberty University’s Strategic Plan
Two months into his time at Liberty, Costin has already begun to work with departments to develop a strategic plan that will address the entire university and the people who form it. In creating this plan, he has consulted faculty and staff at all levels for input based on their own experiences, and he has expressed his excitement for what is to come.
“One of the things that I think any leader should do is recognize that they’re never the smartest person in the room. Yes, they may have good ideas, but their ideas are limited by their fallible or limited scope. My approach has always been, coming into a new place, to legitimately ask the question, ‘Where are we and where should we be going?’ I showed up on July 1. Do I have ideas about where we are? Sure, I have ideas about where we are, but do I know where we are? Not exactly. I know more now 60 days in than I knew at the beginning. The process we’re doing now is simply asking the question of the experts, and the experts are all of us — faculty, staff, students, alumni, and community leaders. Liberty University is a well-oiled machine, staffed with incredibly smart people, passionate people, Christian people who are called by God to do great things, and any leader’s job is to ask, ‘Are we doing everything that we’re doing as well as we can be doing it?’ and ‘Are we doing enough of it?’ The strategic planning process will answer those questions. Where are we now? We’re at Point A, and in four or five months I’ll be able to say what Point B is. No day is the same. We wake up every morning and… we get to do something great for the Lord today, and He’s planting us at Liberty University to do exactly that.”
The Definition of Success
Being successful as a university and as a president, Costin explained, is relative to the specific goals that he has for Liberty. In addition to the academic and logistical accomplishments that all universities strive for, Liberty has the larger purpose of creating and refining Christian leaders who will be successful in their given field and live their lives on Earth for the glory of God.
“In the Christian life and university life, we have to define for (Liberty) what success looks like, and success for us is going to be different than it might be for a secular institution. There are going to be a lot of things that look the same; we count a lot of the same things — how many students do we have, how much revenue comes in, how many classes are offered, how many degree programs, what’s our retention rate, what is the graduation rate. In those respects, we can measure success by what the established standard is. But with Liberty University, and I would argue every distinctively Christian university, we have to do so much more than that because we aren’t just handing people diplomas at the end; we are giving them preparation not just for this life but also preparation for the next life. If somebody comes to Liberty University and they think they’re here just to get a degree, and we let them do the whole four years and graduate having never been confronted with the Gospel — if they’re never confronted with the idea that they have been put on this planet for a purpose that is far bigger than themselves — then we aren’t successfully doing what our university is here to do. It’s our job to equip them and shape them and mold them and push them to do things even bigger than they thought they should do them. Success really comes as a measure against what God wants for you to do and to be.”
Being L.E.A.D.E.R.S. at Liberty
Costin’s philosophical principles about leadership, both for himself and for others at Liberty, is summarized in the acronym L.E.A.D.E.R.S. — Lordship, Environment, Accountability, Development, Execution, Result, and Shepherding.
“I spoke to the faculty (at a faculty Convocation on Aug. 28), and what I mentioned to them is that there’s this phrase that is often used around here: ‘If it’s Christian, it ought to be better.’ And that was from Dr. Falwell. What was he saying? He was saying something brilliant, and he was parroting the Scriptures. Everything you do should be done for the glory of God, and if you’re a Christian, in whatever job you’re doing, settling for mediocrity isn’t OK. So as a university, we should do that. I modified it simply to say this: ‘If it’s Christian, it ought to be Christian.’ If it’s Christian, it ought to be such that we are living our lives following the Lord; we should take every thought captive for Christ. We should not bifurcate, ‘Well, this is my church world, this is my family world, and this is my university world.’ Everywhere you are, you are engaging with men and women, boys and girls, who have been created in the image of God. If you have a leadership responsibility, if you lead one person, you have the same obligation that I have, and that is you have to be the shepherd of the flock God has given you.”
Proclaiming Christ in Higher Education
In a society that seems to have neglected or even outright rejected God, Liberty University remains steadfast in its belief that He is the Creator and Lord over all. Rather than bending or quieting its values in order to match others around the world, Costin said Liberty will continue to boldly share the truth that God has never left and never will. He recounted his time as a military chaplain, when he saw many people who were uncertain about God’s role in the world today, some even scared to mention religion at all.
“A Christian university is going to be more important in the coming decades, not less. Some of our peer institutions have said through the past decade that the culture is going one way… that for us to be able to keep up with the times, we need to lower our standards, we need to pull back from biblical convictions, so that we can keep up with the Joneses or keep up with the times. From the very beginning of time, people have thought they knew better than God. Adam and Eve thought they knew better than God. In all of the book of Judges, or basically all the Old Testament, you look at how everyone did what was right in his own eyes, and Israel has a period of falling away. We’re now in a period of history when humankind has thought we don’t need God, that we know better than God. What Liberty University has to do is say, ‘We are not departing from the faith that was once and for all delivered to the saints. Here we are. We’re not doing this because we’re braggadocious or (prideful); we’re doing this because we understand who God is, who He has called us to be. We are just simply Training Champions for Christ so that they will go out into these various spheres of influence and be a reminder in these pockets that God is still God, and He wants the best for us.”
Why Christian Education Is Worth It
From the beginning of Liberty University, when Dr. Falwell laid out his original vision, giving students an opportunity to earn a Christ-centered education has remained a core objective. Due to inflation, costs have continued to rise for every family and organization. Costin addressed affordability and said receiving a Christian education from a four-year university like Liberty is well worth the investment, allowing students to grow in more than just their academics and financial earnings.
“Yes, we’re a university, which sounds like a building, but a university is not a building. A university is people, and so you have students and their parents who are fighting hard to find the money to pay for a Christian education because it’s worth it. (We) have faculty and staff who are fighting hard to be here when many of them could go elsewhere and make more money, and they’re fighting hard to be here because it’s worth it. People ask, ‘What’s the value of a Christian education?’ It is in the fact that God wants Christians to understand God better. God wants Christians to understand how to be a critical thinker, how to be a problem solver, how to evaluate a text, how to look at data, how to put all that together and advocate for policies and principles and people in ways that are going to be good for society. Is it true that most every student, if you get a college degree, will have lifetime earnings on average that are going to be more than others? Yes, that’s true. But that’s not why you do this. You do it mostly so that you can understand God better and go be a Champion for Christ.”
Reshaping Generation Z
Today’s college students are what Costin calls “digital natives,” people who have grown up with technology an arm’s reach away. With that, he said, comes both good and bad influences on their social dynamics. Noting that his own upbringing and large portion of his career had passed before the Internet even existed, he said as the leader of a university filled with young people who have been shaped by the digital age, it’s worth exploring the likely correlations between increased mental health challenges and decreased religiosity and the warped definition of community developing among members of Generation Z as they interact on “unblemished” social media accounts.
“It’s not the leader’s job to say, ‘I wish everybody was like me. I wish everybody was raised the way I was. I wish everybody thought the way I did.’ The leader’s job is to recognize that these are the people you have, this generation is what it is, and it’s not your job to try to wish your way. Your job as a leader is to bring these folks in, inspire them to do great things, and help them understand that they can actually be involved in a cause that’s bigger than themselves. This generation is looking for meaning and purpose and value and identity. Technology has brought this false notion that you can have friends on certain social media platforms that you’ve never even seen before, and they’ve only seen the curated stuff, the good stuff. Don’t you think they have bad stuff that they’re not showing? Don’t you have bad stuff? Don’t you have difficulty? If the Bible had been Facebook or Twitter or Instagram, it would be all amazing and no mistakes, but that’s not the way the Bible is. The Bible has heroic people making really dumb decisions and having to live with those decisions, and God being there going, ‘Listen, I’m here for you. Just call upon me.’ What Liberty University does extremely well is help people understand the significance, the importance, the purpose, the essential nature of belonging. We do everything in our power with God’s help to force people, in the best of ways, to at least confront the fact that what you think of as community isn’t community. We have a true community here.”
A Training Ground for Champions for Christ
When parents, guardians, or others who have “poured their heart and soul” into young people decide where to send their son or daughter, they are choosing the place where he or she will be experiencing significant life moments and potential change, Costin said. He affirmed that Liberty University will remain a place where students can safely ask questions about God, be encouraged to deepen their faith, and enjoy fellowship with other believers — all of which are not often found at secular schools.
“If you send your child whom you’ve poured into — you’ve told them that the Bible is the Word of God, that the Bible is inerrant, that God loves them with everlasting love, that Jesus Christ is the only way of salvation, that that Creation is true — and then they go off to a secular school, they will have new friends who have not been raised that way, perhaps who have been raised in a completely different way. They are going to have to get themselves up out of bed to go to class and to church with people around them saying, ‘That Jesus stuff, that’s kid stuff. That’s fake stuff. That’s old stuff. You’ve got to get with the times.’ How do you like their chances? How do you like their chances when a Ph.D. who is anti-Christian stands in front of the class as an authority figure and around them are peers who are denigrating the faith of this child that you’ve raised, who for the first time doesn’t have the support structure? Wouldn’t it be so much better, in this very formative period of their life, to send them to an unapologetically Christian school where every faculty member and every staff member is a professing believer in Jesus Christ who understands that He is the only way of salvation and that the world is created by God? They have Convocation twice a week, they have (community) groups, they have professors who love the Lord, who are training them to be Champions of Christ and who aren’t afraid of their questions. If I were a parent today thinking about where I’m going to send my kid to college and I’m going to be paying for it, I like my chances a lot better sending them to Liberty than I do sending them to any secular school I can think of.”
Watch the full interview:"
"https://www.liberty.edu/human-resources/careers-at-liberty-university/","Careers at Liberty University
Work at Liberty University and Join Us in Training Champions for Christ
Come alongside us as we develop Christ-centered men and women with the values, knowledge, and skills essential for impacting the world for Christ. Be a part of a Christian university that’s committed to academic excellence, grounded in faith, and has a global influence.
Working at Liberty, in whatever capacity, you would have a hand in helping us change the world by Training Champions for Christ—one student at a time.
Here, you’ll have the opportunity to work in an awe-inspiring campus with pioneering technology applications that promote and support the culture at Liberty. We are a diverse group of committed men and women who are dedicated to our mission and who represent the hope of Christ in our daily work. Join us!
Get International Employment Information
Get Information About Campus Security
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span><span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
See Employment Openings At Liberty University
Employee Benefits
We offer a variety of health, financial, educational, and personal employee benefits to help you live your life to the fullest. 
Health Insurance
We offer health, dental, and vision benefits for employees
Paid Time Off
Enjoy generous PTO and 40 hour work weeks
Continuing Education
100% tuition discount on your degree (most degrees apply)
403(b) and Match
We match up to 5% of 403(b) retirement contributions
Life & Disability 
Coverage is available for unexpected life events
Education Benefits for Dependents
100% tuition discount for your dependents (most degrees apply)
Employee Assistance
Access to professional resources to help you navigate difficult circumstances
Wellness
Free Early Bird Membership with Liberty’s LaHaye Rec & Fitness Center
Why Teach at Liberty University?
Many of our experienced faculty choose to teach at Liberty — not because of our beautiful campus or cutting-edge classroom technology, but because they desire to teach from a Christian worldview. And if you ask, many will tell you that teaching at Liberty is not just their job — it’s their personal ministry.
See Available Full-Time Faculty Positions 
See Available Adjunct Faculty Positions
Why Work At Liberty University?
Whatever capacity you work in at Liberty University, you’ll be playing a supportive role in our mission of Training Champions for Christ. Liberty has a wide variety of engaging and challenging positions available that are waiting for committed men and women of integrity just like you.
See Available Staff Positions
See Available Student Positions"
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/products/mylu-portal/","The myLU portal offers a new look that creates an improved user-friendly experience that is personalized for our students on both desktop and mobile. Content has been organized in a way that allows our students to get personalized information and LU campus updates in a single location.
Access myLU
Organized Navigation
Navigation has been re-organized to better fit the needs of our students. By utilizing Sets, information is now categorized by specific groupings rather than having a full list of widgets.
Academics – Get everything you need to stay on track during the semester.
Register for Class
View course announcements
Check your degree completion plan
Access the JFL library
Athletics – Check out what’s going on in the world of Liberty Sports!
Get score Updates
Check schedules
Buy tickets to your favorite sporting events
Club Sports Updates
Student Life – From 24/7 prayer to fitness the Student Life set has all the accommodations to make every life easy.
Campus Maps & Buses
On Demand Rides
Flame Pass
Find a job or internship using Career Finder
Finance – Access snapshot estimates of Financial Aid award packages to stay up to date and review college costs.
View Financial Aid Summary
Filter Financial Aid per academic year
View missing financial documents
Check aid award messages
Dining – Hungry and want to grab a bite to eat between activities? Check out all of your food options.
Check Menu’s on the go!
Order food online
Media – Want to go to that big event on campus but have to study? Stay connected with live media.
Campus Event Live Stream
Sports Live Streaming
Campus Live Cams
IT – Everything tech in one location.
Connect with the IT HelpDesk to receive technical assistance
HelpDesk D-I-Y
Shop the IT Marketplace
Relevant Updates
The newsfeed in myLU is a place for users to view information about their upcoming academic schedule while simultaneously keeping up with the happenings around campus.
Ease of Access
See a quick view of items associated with your current academic career. Easily access your email from the home screen and respond quickly while on the go.
Mobile Friendly
We’ve made it more convenient for you to stay up-to-date with various activities and events here at Liberty University. Take advantage of a seamless myLU experience across desktop and mobile from your phone or tablet. With widget updates and improved navigation the myLU app has been redesigned for the current user.
myLUOA 
For more information on the new myLUOA platform, check out the following videos and training documents: 
Students training document
Download the App Today!
Technical Support
For more information on myLU, please check out out our training document.
To learn how to customize your Newsfeed, check out our Newsfeed Settings training document and video.
To learn how to customize navigation menus in myLU, check out our Customizable Navigation Sets training document and video.
To learn how to designate digital successors, check out our Digital Legacy Successors training document.
For technical support on myLU, please contact the IT HelpDesk."
"https://www.liberty.edu/about/sitemap/","Site Map
About Liberty
Contact Liberty University
Liberty Museums 
Chaplains Museum
Jerry Falwell Museum
Rawlings Scriptorium Museum
Purpose & Mission Statement
Visitors Center
Admissions
International Students
Liberty Online Admissions
Parents
Resident Graduate Admissions
Resident Undergraduate Admissions
Academics
Academic Support Offices 
Academic Success Center
Canvas
Career Center
Center for Academic Development
Undergraduate Research Curriculum
Registrar
Aeronautics, School of
Applied Studies & Academic Success, College of 
Academic Success Center
Center for Professional & Continuing Education (CPCE)
General Education
International Student Center
Parent & Family Connections
Professional Advising
Testing Services
Arts & Sciences, College of 
Creation Studies Center
English
Family & Consumer Sciences
General Math & Sciences
History
Interdisciplinary Studies
Mathematics
Modern Languages
ROTC Air Force
ROTC Army
Behavioral Sciences, School of 
Community Care & Counseling
Counselor Education & Family Studies
Psychology
Social Work
Business, School of 
Center for Cyber Excellence
Center for Entrepreneurship
Center for Financial Literacy
Hospitality & Sport Management
Information Technology (INFT)
Communication & the Arts, School of 
Cinematic Arts
Digital Media and Journalism
Strategic and Personal Communication
Studio & Digital Arts
Theatre Arts
Divinity, School of 
Biblical and Theological Studies
Center for Apologetics & Cultural Engagement
Center for Chaplaincy
Center for Church Advancement
Center for Youth Ministries
Christian Leadership and Church Ministries
Global Studies
Theological Studies
Education, School of
Engineering, School of 
Center for Engineering Research & Education (CERE)
Competition Teams & Clubs
Graduate School 
Research Ethics Office 
Institutional Animal Care & Use Committee (IACUC)
Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC)
Institutional Review Board (IRB)
Health Sciences, School of 
Allied Health Professions
Biology & Chemistry
Public & Community Health
Helms School of Government
Honors Program
Law, School of
Library, Jerry Falwell (JFL) 
Archives & Special Collections
Curriculum Library
Jerry Falwell Museum
Music, School of 
Center for Music & Performing Arts
Center for Music & Worship
Nursing, School of
Osteopathic Medicine, College of (LUCOM)
Campus Life
Student Affairs 
Commuter Students
Dean of Students Office 
Community Life
Office of Equity & Inclusion
Residence Life
Student Advocate Office
Student Care Office
Student Government Association
Yearbook
Campus Recreation 
Club Sports
Equestrian Center
Intramural Sports
Outdoor Recreation
Student Activities
Student Centers
University Bands
Faith & Service
Office of Spiritual Development 
LU Shepherd
LU Send
LU Serve
LU Stages
Liberty Worship Collective
Student Leadership
News & Events
Campus Calendar 
University Offices
Complaints
Finance & Administration 
Administrative Accounting
Auxiliary Services 
Dining Services
Postal Services
Transit Services
Facilities Management 
LU Recycling
Financial Aid
Financial Planning & Budgeting
Student Accounts
Human Resources
ID & Campus Services"
"https://www.liberty.edu/nds","Non-Discrimination Policy
Liberty University does not engage in unlawful discrimination or harassment because of race, color, ancestry, religion, age, sex, national origin, pregnancy or childbirth, disability or military veteran status in its educational programs and activities. Liberty University maintains its Christian mission and reserves its right to discriminate on the basis of religion to the extent that applicable law respects its right to act in furtherance of its religious objectives. The following persons have been designated to coordinate Liberty University’s compliance with certain anti-discrimination laws: Coordinator of LU Online Disability Accommodation Support at (434) 592-5417 or luoodas@liberty.edu; Director of Disability Accommodation Support (Residential) at (434) 582-2159 or odas@liberty.edu; Executive Director of Title IX at (434) 592-4999 or TitleIX@liberty.edu.
School-Specific Non-Discrimination Policies
College of Osteopathic Medicine
Rawlings School of Divinity
School of Behavioral Sciences
Contacts
Nathan Friesema (Title IX—Students)
Title IX Coordinator
nlfriesema@liberty.edu
(434) 592-4999
Steve Foster (Title IX/Disability—Employment)
Deputy Title IX Coordinator
HR@liberty.edu
(434) 592-7330
Erin Hagen (Title IX—Athletics)
Deputy Title IX Coordinator
ehagen1@liberty.edu
(434) 592-4951
Denny McHaney (Disability—Resident Students)
wdmchane@liberty.edu
(434) 582-2159
Edwina Berryman (Disability—Online Students)
luoodas@liberty.edu
(800) 424-9595
U.S. Department of Education
Office of Civil Rights (OCR)
400 Maryland Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20202-1100
(800) 421-3481 (Customer Service Hotline)
(202) 453-6012 (fax)
(877) 521-2172 (TDD)
OCR@ed.gov
https://www.ed.gov/ocr
Additional Resources
Office of Equity & Inclusion
Office of Equity & Compliance (Title IX )
Campus Safety and Security
Human Resources – Equal Employment Opportunity
Office of Disability Accommodation Support (ODAS)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/article/overwhelming-grace/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Alumni 
Overwhelming Grace
Nursing graduate says God saved her from a life of addiction and homelessness to give her a second chance at Liberty
Since giving her past of addiction, fear, and darkness over to the Lord, Whitney Harris (’23) has forged a new life for herself while earning her Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN) through the Liberty University School of Nursing.
Harris said walking across the stage at Commencement brought a wave of thankfulness and humility, a true reminder of how far God has brought her.
“In that moment, I was overwhelmed with God’s grace, knowing that I am so undeserving of this life, and it’s only by His grace that I was there,” she said. “He helped me, and He has been here with me the whole way. He gave me the strength to do it. It’s a gift from God.”
Harris grew up in Huntington Beach, Calif., 31 miles from Los Angeles, with parents who were part-time missionaries in West Africa. Going to church every Sunday was a family rule, but as a teenager, Harris started to rebel against her religious upbringing.
“I started avoiding religion, avoiding God, and I really didn’t want anything to do with Him or the church,” she said. “I started resenting my parents, feeling that I was forced to go to church, even though that wasn’t the case. Nothing about Jesus attracted me, and I was very much attracted to living in the world. I felt like freedom came from doing whatever I wanted to do, and so that’s what I pursued.”
This led to underage drinking and smoking in addition to partying throughout high school and for many years afterward. She eventually began using methamphetamines daily. Her parents had moved to Africa for full-time mission work, and she tried to convince them that she would dig herself out of the hole of addiction — a hole that was getting deeper and deeper.
“My family knew that I was far from God, they knew I didn’t want anything to do with Him, but they just kept praying on my behalf that I would come back like a prodigal child and come back to God,” she said. “I told them I would get out of (addiction) myself and to stay in Africa. But at that time, I felt like I was dying on the inside.”
Over the next few years, her substance abuse increased, including prescription medications and heroin. She started living out of her car because she couldn’t afford rent.
Today, she sees this time in her life as a period of blindness.
“I was very, very far from God, and I know that I was completely blinded by the enemy,” she said. “God’s Word says that the enemy blinds the minds of the unbelievers to keep them from seeing the glory of Christ, and I was completely blinded from anything spiritual.” 
Despite trying to get clean multiple times and checking into multiple rehabs and detoxes, Harris would repeatedly leave these facilities to give in to her addictions. She would end up homeless, doing things she never thought she’d do to get another hit and feeling numb to the world around her.
In 2018, a family friend offered to buy Harris a bus ticket to a rehab clinic in San Francisco, and Harris accepted with a renewed fortitude to change her life. She packed what she had onto the bus and began the journey, but when the bus stopped for passengers to get off and take a break, she came back to the parking lot and found it had departed without her. A kind man offered to drive her the three hours to San Francisco, and unbeknownst to Harris, the man was a Christian.
“He started driving me down south, and the whole time he only talked about Jesus and God,” she said. “He told me about his church, his ministry, and his grandkids, and it was a seed that was being watered in my life that kept pointing me to God. This random man I hitchhiked with was a servant of God who pointed me to Him. Even when I was still a sinner, when I was so dead of my sins, Christ was still there for me.”
Harris made it to the clinic and spent the next five months in the program, and has remained clean since then.
A few weeks into the program, Harris was confronted with a different type of obstacle: a positive pregnancy test. She asked God for clarity. She knew that her decision would change the course of her life.
“I remember sitting outside and crying out to God because I was so hurt,” she said. “I was weeping and felt this deep anguish, sorrow, sadness, and an overwhelming fear of my future. I barely knew who the father was. I didn’t know what to do. I just said, ‘God, please help me. I can’t go on any longer.’” 
God gave her an answer.
“I felt Him answer me so quickly and say, ‘Come with me, and you will never have to go back to this life again,’” Harris recalled. “I felt like He was calling me by name, and I remember just sitting there thinking ‘I’m going to follow Jesus and leave this life of sin, and I’m going to pursue Him with everything I have.’ I meant it; I wasn’t holding anything back, and I was ready to leave the whole world for Him.”
She walked back into the clinic and started to read a Bible that was in her room. She felt as if the words were breathing new life into her lungs.
“I was being set free from all the sin that I was entangled with for all of my life,” she said. “I read that I was forgiven, and that just blew my mind. I was overwhelmed by His grace; I still am to this day. God just covered me in mercy because I was, and am, so undeserving of His grace and His mercy. How can you love someone like me who has done what I’ve done? At that moment, things started changing, and my heart was regenerated by the Holy Spirit.”
Harris celebrates at Commencement with her son, Maverick, and his adoptive parents, Dana and Darren Murph.
Knowing that she could not provide for a child at the time, Harris decided to put her baby up for adoption once it was born and soon saw God open a door in Charlotte, N.C., where she connected with the adoptive parents, Dana and Darren Murph. 
“They’re the most wonderful, beautiful, loving, humble couple I’ve ever met,” Harris said. “They welcomed me into their family. It was more than just an adoption or a transaction; it was the pure love of Christ being shared.”
In 2018, while still pregnant, Harris decided to attend College For A Weekend (CFAW) on Liberty’s campus, where her sister was studying at the time. 
“I was walking around the campus, I thought that maybe I could come here,” she said. “God was kind of tugging on my heart to go here, so I applied and then Liberty accepted me.”
Harris gave birth to her son, Maverick, a few months after her visit, and she remains in contact with both him and his adoptive parents. In the delivery room, the comfort and encouragement she received from the nurses gave Harris a desire to become a nurse herself.
“They really impacted my stay as a patient and they influenced my life,” she said. “I can still picture them to this day. In my heart, I said I wanted to be that nurse to someone. I want to be someone who truly cares, loves, and serves.”
Whitney Harris meets with School of Nursing Interim Dean Tracey Turner. Harris said many faculty members, including Turner, were her mentors.
“I applied (to LUSON), which was a big stretch because my GPA wasn’t good and I had my background (with drug abuse), but I just prayed and I got the letter saying they accepted me into the program,” she added. “In moments like that, I’m just overwhelmed with God’s grace because of all my sins from my past and what I’ve done. He made a way for me.”
Over the past four years in Liberty’s nursing program, Harris said God has blessed her path with professors and other faculty who have strengthened her both as a nurse and a believer. 
“The nursing faculty are filled with love and the Holy Spirit. I love every nursing teacher, they’ve really influenced my (time) here,” she said. “They will always emphasize we’re working unto the Lord and explain how to do that as a nurse. I’ve really loved the devotions they do in class and how they train us to acknowledge that we’re not here just to do our jobs, that we’re ultimately here to do it all for God.”
She has also been inspired by her classmates and fellow Liberty students.
“I feel like God has given me a second chance at life here at Liberty,” she said. “I never had the college experience (at the usual age), and being here surrounded by Christians, I’ve been so encouraged in my faith and my life.”
With her BSN completed, Harris is now praying about the next steps in her career. She hopes to find a way to combine nursing with helping others in the same situation that she once found herself, people who are “without hope.”
“I really want to minister to people in addiction, and I want to tell them what Jesus has done for me,” she said. “I just want to go where God wants me to go and use my testimony to give people hope, knowing that He has the power to break any chain and change any life.” 
Related Articles
Running in the Land of Opportunity
Liberty University alumnus and U.S. Army Capt. Sam Chelanga (’11) is leaning on his faith as he looks to represent his country through both his military service and as a…
The Gift of Family
Liberty University founder Dr. Jerry Falwell’s heartbeat for children still pulses in the lives of many families who have been blessed by adoption, including the family of Callie and Kendra…
Biblically Based
For over 40 years, Liberty University alumnus Gene Albert has used his passion for preserving some of the world’s oldest Bibles to share the powerful message of the Gospel. …
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/article/shining-bright/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
News & Events 
Shining Bright
For the first time in school history, Liberty University graduates walked into Williams Stadium at night and turned their tassels under the stadium lights before watching a fireworks show, the perfect finale to the celebration.
This year’s Commencement, which included the Main Ceremony on the evening of May 12 and 26 separate degree presentation ceremonies May 11-13 at different locations around campus, was one of the largest in school history. An estimated crowd of 60,000 — graduates, family members, and friends — visited campus over the three days. More than 28,000* degrees were conferred upon the Class of 2023, Liberty’s 50th graduating class.
With a large majority of this year’s graduates earning their degrees through Liberty University Online Programs, many of those who participated in Commencement were visiting campus for the first time.
The Main Ceremony provided a chance for all graduates to join together with friends and to be inspired and encouraged by music, worship, and a powerful message from world-renowned evangelist and Samaritan’s Purse President Franklin Graham. The event opened with the Liberty University Wind Symphony playing the processional fanfare as graduates made their way into the stadium. Liberty co-founder Dr. Elmer Towns carried the university mace as he led the grand processional. LU Praise, Liberty’s premier gospel choir, and the Liberty Worship Collective led the crowd in worship throughout the ceremony.
Interim President Jerry Prevo recognized and celebrated many groups in attendance, including those graduating with honors, active duty and military veterans, and parents and grandparents of the graduates. He shared some of Liberty’s successes in athletics and academics this school year, and he thanked the many students who have volunteered their time to aid those around the country and the world. 
“You are an extraordinary group, an exciting group of students, and I believe that you are going to be world-changers as you leave this place,” he said. “As you leave Liberty with your diploma in hand, you’re going to be moving on to make your dreams come true as Champions for Christ, and I know that you’re going to be successful.”
Prevo noted that this year marked Liberty’s highest enrollment between its online and resident programs with over 130,000 students. He attributed the numbers to more people seeking a university with an “unwavering commitment to its biblical foundation and mission” and one that “does not apologize for its biblical stand on social issues.”
Graham then began his message by citing his personal connection to Liberty’s founder, Dr. Jerry Falwell, and his memory of Falwell pointing to the land on Liberty Mountain with the dream and intent to turn it into a school that would train generations of Champions for Christ.
“(Falwell) was a man who was deeply committed to God,” Graham said. “He was obedient to what God called him to do, to build this university and pastor Thomas Road Baptist Church. He was a man of incredible vision. What you see here on this beautiful campus today is God’s hand of blessing on the foundation Dr. Falwell laid some 52 years ago. God has honored his faithfulness.”
“I want you to stand up, to shout out,
to lift up your voice, to lift up the truth, and live for
Jesus Christ. As you leave here today with this degree, use it for God’s glory.”
— Franklin Graham
Recalling what it was like to be a new college graduate himself, Graham said he had no clue what lay ahead for his life. With no plan, he chose to be available to God’s ultimate plan, and he encouraged the Class of 2023 to do the same.
Much like how a pilot utilizes navigational tools, Graham said Christians need to follow the directions of God’s Word in order to get to where He wants them to be.
“You want a compass to be true, you want it to be calibrated correctly,” he said. “Not only your navigation depends on it, but your life depends on it. You can be off just one degree and entirely miss your destination. We’ve got to keep our course set on Jesus Christ and not allow Satan to distract us from God’s plan and purpose for our lives. There’s only one way to God, and that’s through His Son, Jesus Christ. Keep your eyes on Him.”
Graham explained that Christians are often told to “sit down and shut up” when it comes to sharing their beliefs and God-breathed truth, but he empowered them to stand firm.
“I want you to stand up, to shout out, to lift up your voice, to lift up the truth, and live for Jesus Christ,” Graham said. “As you leave here today with this degree, use it for God’s glory. But more importantly, hold up His banner of truth to a dying, skeptical, sin-sick world. Know Him, trust Him, live for Him, lift Him up, and I hope you’ll go forth today as His Champions for Christ.”
Dr. David Jeremiah, pastor of Shadow Mountain Community Church in El Cajon, Calif., delivered the benediction.
Rebecca Fischer (’23), who received her master’s in executive leadership, described the main ceremony as “an absolutely beautiful, moving time.”
“I thought that it was an amazing time for us to be together here as a group, as a bunch of students, families, and friends. It brought everything together,” she said. “(It was) the culmination of our faith, of our studies, of the university, the journey of everyone.”
“This was the absolute best way (the Class of 2023) can go out from Liberty (into the world),” added Patrick Jamison (’23), who earned his bachelor’s in cinematic arts. “For the incredible four years I’ve had here, this was the way to do it.” 
*All data reported is based on preliminary numbers for the 2022-23 academic year.
Related Articles
In first visit to LU, Gov. Ron DeSantis wages war on woke
Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis shared the importance of fighting for truth amid a culture that has seen the woke agenda rapidly gain ground in recent years. …
Mike Pence visits Liberty Law for day of celebration and remembrance
48th Vice President of the United States Mike Pence visited Liberty University School of Law for two private events: the annual Ad Fontes ceremony and a Consecration Service open to…
Top Scholars
Three Liberty students have accepted prestigious scholarships to teach and/or grow in their respective fields. …
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/archived-issues/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Archived Issues
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/section/faith-service/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Faith & Service Articles
Keeper of the Mission
While serving as interim president, Jerry Prevo was often asked about his vision for Liberty, and he would always point back to Dr. Falwell’s vision — the vision that started…
June 22, 2023 in Faith & Service 
Partners in Ministry
Liberty’s relationship to Franklin Graham, his family, and Samaritan’s Purse, the humanitarian aid organization he heads, can be traced back many decades. …
June 22, 2023 in Faith & Service 
Serving with Great Expectation
LU Serve Now sent a team of students and a few staff in late January to be the hands and feet of Jesus in Romania.
March 15, 2023 in Faith & Service 
Live from Liberty
Liberty University’s state-of-the-art facilities and vibrant, Christ-centered student body have made campus an alluring location for the filming and recording of live music videos and albums for contemporary Christian music…
March 15, 2023 in Faith & Service 
David Jeremiah tells students to allow past blessings to be motivation for the future
Pastor and author David Jeremiah made his fourth visit to Liberty University Convocation on Jan. 25, bringing with him a message about trusting in God’s provision and promise.
March 15, 2023 in Faith & Service 
LU co-founder receives Lifetime Awards for global ministry
Liberty University co-founder Dr. Elmer Towns was recognized by the Global Church Network last fall, adding to his already impressive list of awards he has received throughout his life of…
March 15, 2023 in Faith & Service 
Fall Convocation lineup in line with Liberty’s mission
The fall schedule officially kicked off on Aug. 24 with a special worship Convocation featuring guest singer-songwriter Micah Tyler and is highlighted by the 48th Vice President of the United…
September 20, 2022 in Faith & Service, News & Events 
Broadcasting a Vision
Throughout multiple eras of television and radio broadcasting, Liberty University’s founder, Dr. Jerry Falwell, was committed to using “every available means” to spread the Gospel. Those efforts also helped to…
April 22, 2022 in Academics, Faith & Service, Alumni 
Seeds for Souls
Spurred on by the founder and his legacy, Liberty’s church planters have impacted lives for Christ across the U.S. and abroad Liberty University founder Jerry Falwell Sr. served in every…
April 21, 2022 in Faith & Service 
Welcoming ‘The Chosen’
The stories of Jesus Christ and those who walked the earth with Him are the most powerful stories to ever make it on screen. Now, “The Chosen,” the first multi-season…
April 21, 2022 in Faith & Service, News & Events 
Small Steps, Big Faith
Liberty University is a special place. Not just because of the tens of thousands of students who are currently studying here. Not just because of the amazing faculty and staff…
April 22, 2022 in Faith & Service 
Chairman of Liberty’s Board of Trustees Tim Lee Shares Testimony of Restoring Relationship with God
Note: This article was first published in the 50th Anniversary Special Edition of the Liberty Champion, the university’s student newspaper. The edition features stories about Liberty’s trailblazers, timelines of key…
April 22, 2022 in Faith & Service 
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/section/alumni/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Alumni Articles
Overwhelming Grace
Since giving her past of addiction, fear, and darkness over to the Lord, Whitney Harris (’23) has forged a new life for herself while earning her BSN through Liberty’s School…
June 21, 2023 in Alumni 
Running in the Land of Opportunity
Liberty University alumnus and U.S. Army Capt. Sam Chelanga (’11) is leaning on his faith as he looks to represent his country through both his military service and as a…
June 22, 2023 in Athletics, Alumni 
The Gift of Family
Liberty University founder Dr. Jerry Falwell’s heartbeat for children still pulses in the lives of many families who have been blessed by adoption, including the family of Callie and Kendra…
June 22, 2023 in Alumni 
Biblically Based
For over 40 years, Liberty University alumnus Gene Albert has used his passion for preserving some of the world’s oldest Bibles to share the powerful message of the Gospel. …
June 22, 2023 in Alumni 
The Next Chapter
Throughout her impressive career in media and politics, Liberty University alumna Lyndsay Keith (’10) has been determined to view her vocation as a platform to advance the Kingdom of God….
June 22, 2023 in Alumni 
Looking Back
Reflecting on the history of the The Food Court at Reber-Thomas and a ring worn by Liberty co-founder Dr. Elmer Towns. …
June 22, 2023 in Alumni 
Family affair: Siblings get early jump start on college degrees
Amanda Esposito, 17, and her brother Luke Esposito, 15, are two of the youngest members of the Class of 2023. …
June 22, 2023 in Alumni 
Army nurse officer becomes Liberty School of Nursing’s first Ph.D. graduate
Lt. Col. Brandy Clayton (’23) has been leading the way for her peers and the next generation of nurses. Now, she is leading the way as the first graduate of…
June 22, 2023 in Alumni 
History student and local teacher battles through cancer to earn degree
Despite a shocking cancer diagnosis, Carlton Payne (’23) completed his master’s from Liberty’s Department of History. …
June 22, 2023 in Alumni 
At 90, Liberty’s oldest graduate fulfills lifelong dream — and much more
Lola-Joy Borella, 90, of Lynchburg, made her dream of earning her master’s degree come true this May. …
June 22, 2023 in Alumni 
Military graduates recognized at special events
The 5,908 graduates with military ties within the Class of 2023 participated in the university’s annual Military Graduate Recognition Ceremony, held on May 12. …
June 22, 2023 in Alumni 
NFL player-turned-doctor leads mission in his native homeland of Nigeria
Whether he was running through defenders in the NFL or studying relentlessly for medical school exams, Dr. Samkon Gado, M.D., (’05) has led a life marked by resiliency and obedience…
March 15, 2023 in Alumni 
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/article/keeper-of-the-mission/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Faith & Service 
Keeper of the Mission
Liberty shows appreciation to Jerry Prevo for his faithful leadership
When Jerry Prevo became interim president of Liberty University on Aug. 10, 2020, he had recently retired as the pastor of Anchorage Baptist Temple, a role he faithfully filled for 47 years. But he was no stranger to the university way across the continent. Joining God in His work on Liberty Mountain in Lynchburg was something he had done for decades as a close friend of Liberty’s founder, Dr. Jerry Falwell, and a longtime member of the Board of Trustees. Prevo had served on the board since 1996 and had been chairman since 2003.
The bush pilot and outdoorsman left his home in Alaska to take on a new role because of a single reason: telling people about Jesus and training young people to live for the Lord is his lifelong passion.
While serving as interim president, Prevo was often asked about his vision for Liberty, and he would always point back to Dr. Falwell’s vision — the vision that started it all, the vision Prevo said he was charged to protect and preserve.
“I’m not here to put my brand on this university; I’m here to keep the brand that Jerry Falwell Sr. laid out 50 years ago,” Prevo said. “I gave him my word that I would do that. And that’s why I’m standing here today. This is God’s university. It always has been, and it always will be.”
A “season of renewal” became a theme of his years as interim president. Although he had accepted the new role at a time when some were uncertain about the university’s direction, his message from the beginning was clear: Liberty would not be “rebuilding.”
“Someone asked me if we’re going to rebuild,” he said in a Fall 2020 interview with the Liberty Journal. “And I said, ‘I don’t want to use that word.’ When you rebuild, it’s because something has been destroyed, and Liberty University has not been destroyed. We don’t need to rebuild. We simply need to reveal what God is doing and has been doing from the beginning through faithful servants like (Liberty’s faculty and staff).
“Like the Church, Liberty University is not a building — it’s not even a campus full of buildings. It’s people. Our people — faculty members, staff members, students, pastors, coaches — are the heart of Liberty University, and that heart has never changed. Many have made the mistake of thinking that the loudest voice speaks for all of us, and that’s just not true. The only name that should define Liberty University is Jesus Christ.”
Pressing forward
On March 31, after three years as interim president, Prevo, along with the Board of Trustees, announced the appointment of Maj. Gen. (Ret.) Dondi E. Costin, Ph.D., as president and Pastor Jonathan Falwell as chancellor. During the press conference, Board Chairman Tim Lee thanked Prevo for his service to the university.
At the Main Commencement Ceremony, Jerry Prevo was presented with a glass bottle from the Donald Duck Bottling Plant, a building that served as the original location of Thomas Road Baptist Church, where Liberty founder Dr. Jerry Falwell began his ministry in 1956.
“Liberty University could not have asked for more competent, wise, and principled leadership over these critical transitional years than it has received from President Jerry Prevo,” Lee said. “His exceptional tenure as interim president has been marked by record enrollment, a refocusing of the university on its original mission, and its institutional reforms, which will provide effective governance of Liberty University going forward.”
Lee again honored Prevo at this year’s Main Commencement Ceremony, presenting a declaration on behalf of the Board of Trustees to give Prevo the title of President Emeritus. In announcing this, Lee described Prevo as being “a miracle” that came in a “crossroads” and “perilous time” for the university. Prevo will remain an active member of the board and has made it clear that his dedication to Liberty will not wane. 
Guided by the Word
Prevo’s time at the helm of Liberty University will be marked by his firm commitment to teaching the Word and allowing it to guide all of his work.
In his first formal address to students as interim president, Prevo shared his favorite Scripture, Romans 12:1-2: “Therefore, I urge you, brothers and sisters, in view of God’s mercy, to offer your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and pleasing to God — this is your true and proper worship. Do not conform to the pattern of this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind. Then you will be able to test and approve what God’s will is — His good, pleasing, and perfect will.”
At every opportunity he had to address students, graduates, and the families who love them, Prevo has been intentional in presenting the Gospel, acknowledging that the university is built on a foundation of Christ’s provision and blessing. Prevo’s final formal address to the student body as interim president, during the April 28 Convocation, was characteristic of his past three years at Liberty. He focused his message entirely on seeking God’s will, on sharing the Gospel, and on students’ spiritual growth. As he has done with every message, he closed with a call to salvation. He also gave every student at Convocation a pocket-sized book, “The Bible Incorporated in Your Job, Your Life, and Your Business,” that contains Scripture references to help guide them throughout their future careers. 
At the Main Commencement Ceremony in Williams Stadium, in front of thousands of graduates, families, and friends, Prevo presented the Gospel.
“Tonight, I would be remiss if I did not tell you about our great God; a God who so loved this world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him shall not perish but have everlasting life,” he said. “Whosoever means you; regardless of what you’ve done, it means you.”
A Friendly Face
Prevo was also known for the constant spiritual encouragement he offered all members of the Liberty community, from students to faculty, staff, and parents. Every week he shared a personal devotional and prayer on Liberty’s social media platforms, and within the pages of the “Liberty Champion,” Liberty’s student-run newspaper, he wrote a weekly column that often lauded students for their academic and athletic achievements, their volunteer service, and the way they represented Liberty, and Christ, in the world.
Prevo celebrated a 2021 snowfall on campus with a snowball fight on the Academic Lawn.
Around campus, students have known Prevo as a friendly face in the crowd. Whether it was cheering alongside other Flames fans at sporting events, leading a Vines Center crowd in singing “Happy Birthday” to students on their special day, or bundling up and throwing snowballs on the Academic Lawn in the winter months, he made a point to engage with students on more than just an administrative level.
Prevo’s hospitable nature was also present in the many visits to campus by the likes of leadership expert John Maxwell, former Vice President of the United States Mike Pence, pastor David Jeremiah, Governor of Virginia Glenn Youngkin, speaker and former NFL quarterback Tim Tebow, and countless others, whether he knew them personally or was greeting them for the first time. 
Arriving at a time of need
The COVID-19 pandemic was at the top of minds and conversations across the campus and the world when Prevo took on the role of interim president, and he led the Liberty community through a global issue that had not been faced on such a scale for nearly a century. He had no model or playbook — no university had ever encountered this — and yet he guided the school through this turbulent time and helped it face the challenge head-on. He kept the health and wellness of the student body the top priority. His encouragement to keep faith in God’s provision, healing, and plan for Liberty proved valuable as the school adjusted schedules and met all regulations in order to continue to provide the highest level of academics and exciting campus life that Liberty has been known for.
Throughout the 2021-22 academic calendar, Prevo facilitated the university’s landmark 50th Anniversary celebration, from the adornment of campus buildings with banners to welcoming the new freshman class, the largest in school history at the time. He also welcomed Liberty alumni and their loved ones to campus for a special Homecoming, recognizing the ways that they had set a foundation and legacy for the university out in the world. 
Prevo created the ‘Liberty in Prayer’ initiative last year.
Prayer has been a hallmark of Prevo’s service to Liberty. In 2022, he created the “Liberty in Prayer” initiative in which students could write down personal prayer requests anonymously and place them into boxes around campus or submit them through an online portal. The initiative was built off of Philippians 4:6: “Be anxious for nothing, but in everything, by prayer and supplication, let your request be made known to God.” The boxes allowed students to read others’ requests and pray for each other individually.
When students gathered in Washington, D.C., to pray for the country, Prevo joined them. Answering the invitation from Franklin Graham in September 2020 to walk the National Mall and pray for the upcoming election, Prevo and his wife, Carol, joined the crowd of over 2,200 Liberty students and tens of thousands of others to ask God to watch over America. Jerry Prevo also joined students in front of the Supreme Court in December 2021 to pray as the opening arguments began in the Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization case, which would later become a key victory for the pro-life movement. 
Getting started
Like Dr. Jerry Falwell, Prevo attended Baptist Bible College in Missouri and began a ministry in 1971 that far surpassed anyone’s expectations. With three years of experience as a Tennessee pastor under his belt, the Prevos moved to Anchorage in 1971 to join a small mission. That small mission became Anchorage Baptist Temple (ABT), and under his leadership it grew into one of the largest churches in Alaska.
Recognizing a need to spread the Gospel even further, Prevo purchased a television station from Alaska Southern Baptist Convention for ABT and launched Christian Broadcasting Inc., a media group that now sends the hope of Christ across the state through three radio stations. Again, much like Dr. Falwell, Prevo knew the value and effectiveness of using multiple forms of media to broadcast the Gospel.
Prevo and ABT also founded Anchorage Christian Schools, the first K-12 Christian school in Alaska. And when parents or high school students asked his advice on where to attend college, Prevo always had one answer: Liberty University.
Liberty founder Dr. Jerry Falwell greets Jerry Prevo at a 1983 Convocation.
He first encountered Liberty when attending Super Conference, Thomas Road Baptist Church’s annual gathering of pastors and ministry leaders, in the ’90s. It was there he met and became friends with Falwell and was invited to join Liberty’s Board of Trustees. Since then, Prevo has had a front row seat to Liberty University’s progress.
“I’ve been a part of this university half its life, and when I got appointed as chairman of the board, Dr. Falwell told me, ‘Now, Jerry, when I’m gone, I want you to do all you can to keep this university carrying out my goal. You keep Training Champions for Christ,’” Prevo recounted. “This is God’s university. It always has been, and it always will be. Yes, we’ll keep training students to become champions in their vocations and workplaces because the world needs gifted professionals. But more importantly, we’ll keep Training Champions for Christ. That’s been the mission of Liberty University since the beginning, and it’s not going to change.”
More work to do
Prevo has continued to honor the founder and uphold the mission by leading the efforts to establish the Jerry Falwell Center, currently under construction and expected to open in 2024. The facility will take guests through a history of Falwell’s life and enduring legacy, featuring innovative technological displays showcasing the university’s multifaceted approach to its mission of Training Champions for Christ.
“The center will show how Liberty is incorporating a Christian worldview and evangelical fervor throughout all areas, including academics, athletics, and student life,” Prevo said. “We want every faculty member, every student to go through the center to understand the vision and legacy of Liberty’s founder. It is a powerful story of God’s faithfulness that everyone needs to hear.”
“There is much to learn from our founder’s life,” Prevo said when the project was first announced in Fall 2021. “He always inspired students to be Champions for Christ wherever God was leading them. We are seeing his mighty vision fulfilled every day at Liberty University, and this center will help ensure that we do not waver from our original mission or succumb to the external pressures of leftism. Jerry Falwell always stood his ground, and he stood unapologetically on the Word of God. Looking to his life as an example, the university will remain committed to the Gospel.” 
Related Articles
Partners in Ministry
Liberty’s relationship to Franklin Graham, his family, and Samaritan’s Purse, the humanitarian aid organization he heads, can be traced back many decades. …
Serving with Great Expectation
LU Serve Now sent a team of students and a few staff in late January to be the hands and feet of Jesus in Romania.
Live from Liberty
Liberty University’s state-of-the-art facilities and vibrant, Christ-centered student body have made campus an alluring location for the filming and recording of live music videos and albums for contemporary Christian music…
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/article/running-in-the-land-of-opportunity/","NCAA champion and Olympic hopeful Sam Chelanga serves God and country in the U.S. Army 
Liberty University alumnus and U.S. Army Capt. Sam Chelanga (’11) is leaning on his faith as he looks to represent his country through both his military service and as a potential member of Team USA at the 2024 Olympic Games.
Sam Chelanga competes for the Army as a member of the WCAP.
Growing up in Nairobi, Kenya, Chelanga began running with the hopes of receiving an athletic scholarship from an American college. His prayers were answered when he accepted an offer from Farleigh Dickinson (N.J.) University; he transferred to Liberty a year later. As a Flame, he became a four-time NCAA champion in cross country and track & field and set the NCAA record for the 10-kilometer run at 27 minutes, 8.39 seconds — a record that still stands today. Under the leadership of former Track & Field Coach Brant Tolsma, Chelanga felt motivated to compete to his highest potential as a Flame and a follower of Christ.
“The best thing I can remember is at Liberty there was this idea that we represent Christ in what we do,” he said. “And there was that pride of saying, ‘You know, if you actually are representing the most powerful being that exists, why wouldn’t you do the best you could?’ And for me, that was freeing.”
Despite not knowing any English when he moved to the U.S., Chelanga said his adjustment was much easier because of the faith that he shared with his peers at Liberty.
“I personally believe that Liberty was easier because we all speak the same language,” he said. “We all believed in God, and that is what we wanted to do our best in.”
“The opportunities I got at Liberty and in the United States are because we as a country have made a bunch of sacrifices. Some of us have paid the price to give freedom and opportunity to everybody. Young kids and young adults need to know that it’s not just something that comes (for free). I don’t want to take it for granted.”
After graduating with a degree in government, he began racing professionally and signed a contract with Nike in 2011. He won six USA Track & Field titles and finished sixth at the U.S. Olympic Team Trials to become an alternate for the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro. In 2017, he finished 11th in the senior men’s race at the IAAF World Cross Country Championships in Kampala, Uganda, the top showing for a U.S. athlete.
Even after his success as a pro athlete, Chelanga had a different finish line in sight: becoming a U.S. citizen. He completed the naturalization process and took the oath in 2015. The honor he felt as an American stirred in him a desire to serve his country. In 2018, he retired from professional running and joined the U.S. Army. 
“I wasn’t born here, but I did get my opportunity here. I made something out of myself here,” he said. 
“The opportunities I got at Liberty and in the United States are because we as a country have made a bunch of sacrifices,” he added. “Some of us have paid the price to give freedom and opportunity to everybody. Young kids and young adults need to know that it’s not just something that comes (for free). I don’t want to take it for granted.”
Chelanga soon began running again, with the hopes of competing for Team USA in the marathon in the 2020 Olympics. (He finished 21st at the U.S. Olympic Marathon Trials, falling short of qualifying for Team USA.) Soon afterward, he became acquainted with the Army’s World Class Athletes Program (WCAP) that helps current service members train for specific Olympic cycles while fulfilling their military duties. He moved to Fort Carson, Colo., where the program is based, with his wife, Marybeth, and three sons Micah, Joseph, and Jeremiah.
Chelanga said he currently runs between 120-140 miles every week when he trains for a marathon, and between 100-110 miles when training for half-marathons.
Chelanga will get another chance to qualify for the Olympic Games when he competes in the 2024 U.S. Olympic Team Trials for the Marathon on Feb. 3, 2024, in Orlando, Fla. Through training with the Army, he can already see the fruits of his labor. In February, he finished first in the Mesa Half Marathon in a time of 1:03.32. He is currently ranked in the top 100 in the world in both the 5K and 10K races.
Chelanga also continues to keep the pace in his spiritual life, sharing life lessons with others. He published his first book in 2020, “With the Wind: Finding Victory Within,” a testimonial about trusting in God for guidance throughout life.
Chelanga joined the Army in 2018.
“One of the big reasons you see people struggle in life is because they have plans for everywhere and everything, but a lot of people overlook the spiritual plan for their life,” he said. “And it is something all of us struggle with. A lot of people don’t see it as something that is paramount to your living.”
One valuable lesson he has learned is the importance of trusting God for guidance. Just as a ship follows the direction of the wind, Chelanga said his goal is to follow God in whatever he is called to do. 
“It doesn’t matter if you work at McDonald’s, a bank, or the military, it’s a full-time gig (to be) faithful and living the best life that God gave you,” he said.
He appreciates the opportunity to serve his country and said just as the Ten Commandments and the Golden Rule say, people should dedicate themselves to helping others regardless of their career path. He said Liberty students, of which he was one himself just over a decade ago, should focus on fulfilling the purpose that God has for them.
“I believe that every kid that goes to Liberty can do great if they have good reasons why they want to change the world for good.”"
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/section/news-events/","Journal Open/Close Navigation 
Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
News & Events Articles
Shining Bright
The Class of 2023 sat under the lights of Williams Stadium to listen to an inspiring message from Franklin Graham before watching a fireworks show, the perfect finale to the…
June 21, 2023 in News & Events 
In first visit to LU, Gov. Ron DeSantis wages war on woke
Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis shared the importance of fighting for truth amid a culture that has seen the woke agenda rapidly gain ground in recent years. …
June 22, 2023 in News & Events 
Mike Pence visits Liberty Law for day of celebration and remembrance
48th Vice President of the United States Mike Pence visited Liberty University School of Law for two private events: the annual Ad Fontes ceremony and a Consecration Service open to…
June 22, 2023 in News & Events 
Top Scholars
Three Liberty students have accepted prestigious scholarships to teach and/or grow in their respective fields. …
June 22, 2023 in News & Events 
Representing LU
Students take their skills across the country and around the world …
June 22, 2023 in News & Events 
Faculty News
Three faculty members from different areas within the university are recognized for their outstanding acheivements in and out of the classroom. …
June 22, 2023 in News & Events 
Casting Crowns
Casting Crowns brought its compelling lyrics and stories to the Vines Center for one of the final Convocations of the spring semester. …
June 22, 2023 in News & Events 
Government students visit embassies in Washington
The Helms School of Government sponsored multiple day trips to our nation’s capital this spring. …
June 22, 2023 in News & Events 
OEC sponsors campus awareness initiatives
Liberty University’s Office of Equity & Compliance (OEC) is continuing its mission of protecting and advocating for the safety and well-being of Liberty students. …
June 22, 2023 in News & Events 
‘Challenge Accepted’
The announcement of Maj. Gen. (Ret.) Dondi E. Costin, Ph.D., as Liberty University’s sixth president and Jonathan Falwell as the university’s third chancellor was a commissioning service for two men…
June 22, 2023 in News & Events 
Life-changing Tunes: Students, alumni join industry leaders in creating powerful worship music to share with the world
Seven Hills Worship is a new assembly of Liberty students and alumni from different music groups and schools across the university who are carrying on the worship tradition that has…
March 15, 2023 in News & Events 
Faculty News: Going International
Liberty University faculty represent God and their schools as professionals in their given fields.
March 15, 2023 in News & Events 
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/section/athletics/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Athletics Articles
Running in the Land of Opportunity
Liberty University alumnus and U.S. Army Capt. Sam Chelanga (’11) is leaning on his faith as he looks to represent his country through both his military service and as a…
June 22, 2023 in Athletics, Alumni 
Honoring the past with eyes on the future
Jake Shellenberger, the founding head coach of the Liberty Women’s Swimming & Diving team, discusses the program’s progression while remembering its roots. …
June 22, 2023 in In Coach's Words, Athletics 
Going out on top in the ASUN
Five Liberty teams went out as ASUN Conference champions and five more won ASUN regular-season titles in 2022-23. …
June 22, 2023 in Athletics 
In the record book
Student-athletes from Liberty’s 20 NCAA Division I teams set numerous program records throughout the 2022-23 school year. …
June 22, 2023 in Athletics 
Liberty Athletics announces new Hall of Fame members
The six new members represent six different sports programs and bring the total number of inductees to 80. …
June 22, 2023 in Athletics 
Demario Douglas 10th Flames Football player to be drafted by NFL
Flames running back Demario Douglas was drafted by the New England Patriots in the sixth round. …
June 22, 2023 in Athletics 
Club Sports teams thrive on the national stage
Highlights from several of Liberty’s 44 Club Sports programs who experienced national success in the 2022-23 school year. …
June 13, 2023 in Athletics 
Firmly Planted
Head Coach Jamey Chadwell says he’ll water the roots where God has moved him.
March 14, 2023 in Athletics 
Developing spiritual leaders on ice
DI women’s hockey Head Coach Chris Lowes describes the mission and takeaways from the Lady Flames’ trip to Finland over Winter Break
March 15, 2023 in Athletics 
McGhee says standout career has been more about people than points
Liberty men’s basketball standout Darius McGhee has concluded a college career that spanned a time of incredible growth for the Flames, and he will be recognized as one of the…
March 15, 2023 in Athletics 
Making the Move
Following successful stays in the Big South Conference (1991-2018) and the Atlantic Sun (ASUN) Conference (2018-present), Liberty University will move its ever-growing athletics teams into Conference USA for the 2023-24…
March 15, 2023 in Athletics 
Rising, Growing, Winning
Flames Nation is showing up in big numbers as Liberty Athletics reaches new heights. …
September 20, 2022 in Athletics 
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/section/in-coachs-words/","Jake Shellenberger, the founding head coach of the Liberty Women’s Swimming & Diving team, discusses the program’s progression while remembering its roots. …"
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/article/the-gift-of-family/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Alumni 
The Gift of Family
Founder’s love for children lives on through lives touched by adoption
Years after his death, Liberty University founder Dr. Jerry Falwell continues to leave a profound impact on the Lynchburg and Liberty community as his heartbeat for children still pulses in the lives of many families who have been blessed through adoption. 
A preacher emboldened to fight for family values in the public sphere, Falwell always treasured God’s design for the family. He found ways to care for precious babies and children, including establishing the Liberty Godparent Home, a place for young pregnant mothers to receive care and counseling in making parenting and adoption plans, offering them an alternative to abortion.
Countless families have been blessed by Falwell’s kindness and generosity, and his legacy lives on in future generations of families who were brought together by this visionary and compassionate pastor.
Callie Penn, who attended Liberty in the 1970s, said this is a side of his pastor that many people did not get to see. He and his wife, Kendra (’79, ’97), are just one of the many couples who have seen the power of God at work through Falwell to meet children’s needs. The couple married in 1997 and wanted to start a family but found out soon after that they could not conceive. Around the time they learned this, they had the idea to start free child care for church members. 
Dr. Jerry Falwell at the Liberty Godparent Home in 1982.
Even though Callie worked for TRBC and Kendra was a singer who traveled for Falwell’s ministries, the Penns hoped that babysitting would allow them to serve God together. 
“We weren’t doing a particular ministry together, so we thought this would be a great way to serve people and get our baby fix at the same time,” Callie said.
But a week after they decided to volunteer to babysit, they were informed that God had made it financially possible for them to adopt a child. 
“My heart sunk because we basically had just told God that we knew we weren’t going to have children; we were just going to babysit. It was almost like God was saying, ‘Oh, yes you are. ’”
They didn’t know at the time that they would receive a double blessing. 
“Little did we know that we would end up being blessed, not only with one child, but with two,” Callie said. “God is a good God and will give you double for your trouble.”
They adopted their son Graham in 2001 and six years later adopted their second son, Jackson. Both were private adoptions, and they received the boys straight from the hospital two days after they were born. 
Callie and Kendra Penn dedicate their second child, Jackson, on May 13, 2007, at Thomas Road Baptist Church with their older son, Graham, and the Rev. Jerry Falwell.
Jackson was the last baby Falwell would ever dedicate to the Lord; Falwell passed away two days after that church service, on May 15, 2007, at age 73.
“God knew Tuesday, May 15, would be Dr. Falwell’s last day here on earth, and He allowed him to dedicate that precious little gift he gave us before he passed,” Callie said.
Through the years, the Penns never knew who had intervened on their behalf to make the adoptions possible — until a couple of years ago when Callie, who now works as the senior life coordinator at TRBC, was talking with a co-worker who had been with the ministry for many years.
“Unbeknownst to us, she had the privilege of knowing our story and eventually made it known to us,” Callie said. “She and I were reminiscing of our friendships with Dr. Falwell and all the wonderful things he did over the course of his life. She asked me how the boys were doing and, after a while, she asked me this question: ‘You do know who made it possible for you to adopt your boys, don’t you?’ I honestly had to tell her, ‘No, I don’t,’ because that information had never been given to us.’ Tears began to well up in her eyes, and my heart was pounding. This was a secret that had been kept hidden for many years. She said it was … Dr. Falwell.”
“It just amazes me how he could do that and go to his grave and not say anything,” Callie added. “It just blows my mind. But that was the kind of man he was. Obviously, he was recognized because of his platform, but there’s a lot of things he did that people never heard about, never saw.”
He said he knew then that “something had to be done in honor of this wonderful man.”
One day in his devotional time, he asked God what he could use in his life as a means of doing good to help others. He said God immediately answered, “Use what I gave you — the boys!”
The Penn family in 2008
“It all came full circle,” Callie said. “Everything that had happened with our adoptions up to this point was one big question, but now it all made sense.”
That’s when the Penns had the vision for Jerry’s Kids Adoption Foundation, named in honor of Falwell’s legacy. The name is a fond reminder of how Liberty students and all young people who were a part of the church and other affiliated ministries used to affectionately call themselves “Jerry’s kids.”
“Any kid who went through the Godparent Home, Early Learning Center, Liberty Christian Academy, and Liberty University, we were all known as ‘Jerry’s Kids,’” Callie said. “He had a heart for kids from the cradle to their Ph.D.”
The foundation launched this past Mother’s Day, May 14. Operating as an independent organization with its own advisory board, Jerry’s Kids exists to raise funds for Christian couples who feel God calling them to adopt. The foundation was established to help couples financially who are going through the adoption process with Family Life Services Adoption Agency, which is based in Lynchburg. The foundation is tax-exempt and is run completely by volunteers, with 100 percent of the funds raised going toward adoption expenses.
Callie said the entire endeavor is about honoring Falwell and bringing glory to God by helping other couples enjoy the blessing of adoption.
“I want to be able to take the kindness and generosity that Dr. Falwell showed us and turn that around and pay it forward to help other couples who are in the position we were in at that time.” 
Now 22 years after becoming parents, the couple still marvels at God’s providence throughout their lives, even when they thought their dreams were crushed.
“It took 22 years to get to this point, but now I see how God took what Satan meant for harm in our marriage and is turning it into good,” Callie said. “And that’s what Dr. Falwell would want. He would want for God to get the glory in this, because it’s not about us. It’s not even about Dr. Falwell. Although he was the vessel God used, he would point everything to God.” 
>>For more information and to donate, visit JerrysKids.US, call (434) 239-9281, or email info@jerryskids.us.
Related Articles
Overwhelming Grace
Since giving her past of addiction, fear, and darkness over to the Lord, Whitney Harris (’23) has forged a new life for herself while earning her BSN through Liberty’s School…
Running in the Land of Opportunity
Liberty University alumnus and U.S. Army Capt. Sam Chelanga (’11) is leaning on his faith as he looks to represent his country through both his military service and as a…
Biblically Based
For over 40 years, Liberty University alumnus Gene Albert has used his passion for preserving some of the world’s oldest Bibles to share the powerful message of the Gospel. …
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/article/challenge-accepted/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
News & Events 
‘Challenge Accepted’
Leaders pledge devotion to future Champions for Christ
The March 31 press conference announcing Maj. Gen. (Ret.) Dondi E. Costin, Ph.D., as Liberty University’s sixth president and Jonathan Falwell, senior pastor of Thomas Road Baptist Church, as the university’s third chancellor was a commissioning service for two men with impressive professional credentials and tremendous giftings from God.
“We believe God sent these leaders to us for such a time as this,” said Board of Trustees Chairman Tim Lee. “The combination of President Costin and Chancellor Falwell will bring the gravitas and experience necessary to lead the university exceptionally well and with perfect cultural alignment. They will ensure Liberty University remains focused entirely on Training Champions for Christ to impact the world in every vocation.”
Lee said he and his fellow search committee members experienced a revival of sorts as it became clear that God had guided them to the perfect leaders at this critical stage in the university’s 52-year history. 
When formally asked if he would accept the board’s offer, Costin replied, “I will. Challenge accepted.”
The dual roles of Liberty’s top two administrators will posture the university for a promising future as it builds on its unchanging spiritual foundation. Falwell assumed his new role on May 1, and Costin will begin on July 1. Jerry Prevo, who has served as interim president for the past three years, will hold the title of President Emeritus and remain on the Board of Trustees (read more about his contributions to Liberty here).
Costin comes to Liberty after five years as president of Charleston Southern University, an institution in South Carolina aligned with the Southern Baptist Convention. His celebrated tenure has been marked by academic and athletic achievement. He oversaw the construction of several new facilities and the substantial expansion of CSU’s academic programs, including South Carolina’s only four-year aviation program, multiple doctoral programs, and an engineering program within the university’s College of Science and Mathematics. Under his leadership, the university set fundraising records, significantly improved its overall rankings, and dramatically exceeded freshman enrollment goals.
Maj. Gen. (Ret.) Dondi E. Costin, Ph.D., and wife Vickey.
“As one whose life and ministry have been profoundly shaped by Liberty University, I can think of no educational institution with more global impact than my two-time alma mater. I am beyond grateful to the Board for entrusting me with this extraordinary opportunity. Vickey and I look forward to locking arms with the Liberty family as we honor the university’s past and drive toward its future. With God’s help and for His glory, the very best days of our great university are still ahead of us.”
— Dr. Dondi Costin
Costin obtained the rank of Major General with the U.S. Air Force, where he devoted 32 years of commissioned service. He completed his military career at the Pentagon as Air Force Chief of Chaplains, serving as senior pastor to more than 664,000 active duty, Guard, Reserve, and civilian forces in the United States and overseas and leading 2,000 chaplains and chaplain assistants from the Air Force Chaplain Corps. During his military service, Costin represented the Liberty Baptist Fellowship as an endorsed chaplain. A decorated combat veteran, he deployed in support of numerous contingency and humanitarian relief operations across the globe and previously served as senior chaplain for Air Force operations in both the Pacific and the Middle East. His military decorations include the Distinguished Service Medal, the Legion of Merit, and the Bronze Star Medal. 
In addition to a bachelor’s degree in operations research from the United States Air Force Academy, Dr. Costin holds five master’s degrees, a Doctor of Ministry degree, and a Ph.D. in organizational leadership. He earned two of his five master’s degrees from Liberty University early in his military career. He and his wife, Vickey, have been married for more than 33 years. Mrs. Costin’s own legacy of public service includes 23 years as a public school educator.
At the press conference, Falwell formally introduced Costin and lauded his distinguished résumé, one he said “makes all of us feel woefully inadequate.”
Costin reciprocated the respect. “Chancellor Falwell, thank you very much for taking the mantle,” he said. “I look so forward to being your wingman. You’re a pilot, I’m from the Air Force, we know what wingmen are all about.”
Falwell said through continual prayer by the board over the years, God appointed a president who was “strongly committed to his Christian faith and his Christian walk and … embraced our mission.”
“When we prayed that prayer over and over and over again, what God did, as God often does, was answer our prayer in an Ephesians 3:20 way — He did exceedingly, abundantly more,” Falwell said. “That is what Dondi Costin brings to Liberty University in the years to come.”
“I have had the opportunity and the privilege to be able to watch as God has raised this place up from nothing to a place that today impacts and changes the world. We once again have reaffirmed our commitment that this university will never sway away from being distinctively Christian, Training Champions for Christ, changing the world through the Gospel of Jesus Christ, standing on the inerrancy and the infallibility of Scripture, that it comes from God and God alone. We are going to work until Christ returns to make sure this place never moves from that position.”
— Jonathan Falwell
Falwell has spent his lifetime associated with the ministries of Thomas Road Baptist Church and Liberty University, serving at Thomas Road Baptist Church for nearly 30 years and as its senior pastor since 2007. He has also served on Liberty’s Board of Trustees for over 30 years. Previously, Falwell held the title of vice chancellor for spiritual affairs and has most recently served as the university’s executive vice president for spiritual affairs/campus pastor.
Falwell, who earned his B.S. at Liberty, his M.A. in Religion from the Liberty Baptist Theological Seminary (LBTS), and his Juris Doctor from Taft (Calif.) Law School, takes the mantle from his father, Dr. Jerry Falwell, Liberty’s founder, who died in May 2007. He and his wife, Shari, have been married since 1992, and they have four children (three are married) and two grandchildren.
The appointments of Costin and Falwell followed an extensive national search conducted by CarterBaldwin Executive Search, one of America’s top executive recruiters, and involved the evaluation of nearly 100 credible candidates over a period of eight months.
A formal investiture ceremony is being planned for October along with several activities for students to participate in during Welcome Week when they return to campus and have the chance to meet their new president.
Related Articles
Shining Bright
The Class of 2023 sat under the lights of Williams Stadium to listen to an inspiring message from Franklin Graham before watching a fireworks show, the perfect finale to the…
In first visit to LU, Gov. Ron DeSantis wages war on woke
Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis shared the importance of fighting for truth amid a culture that has seen the woke agenda rapidly gain ground in recent years. …
Mike Pence visits Liberty Law for day of celebration and remembrance
48th Vice President of the United States Mike Pence visited Liberty University School of Law for two private events: the annual Ad Fontes ceremony and a Consecration Service open to…
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/section/faith-in-focus/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Faith In Focus Articles
The Augustine Way
Dr. Mark D. Allen, a professor of biblical and theological studies at Liberty’s John W. Rawlings School of Divinity, discusses a different apologetical approach. …
June 22, 2023 in Faith In Focus 
The Resurrection of Jesus as a Pointer to His Deity
Unquestionably, Jesus’ resurrection from the dead stands at the very center of the Christian faith, as the Apostle Paul reminded us vigorously in 1 Corinthians 15:11-22. Without it, there is…
March 15, 2023 in Faith In Focus 
Odd Faith
Vice President of Spiritual Development Joshua Rutledge explains the current sermon series happening at Campus Community this semester, titled “Odd Faith.” …
September 20, 2022 in Faith In Focus, News & Events 
The Biblical Basis for Inclusion
This Faith in Focus column was written by Shon Muldrow, Liberty’s Chief Diversity Officer.
April 22, 2022 in Faith In Focus 
Defending Truth and Preserving Freedom
In an increasingly secular and hostile age, the Standing for Freedom Center at Liberty University is taking its stand to uphold the Christian faith and preserve life, liberty, and truth…
April 18, 2022 in Faith In Focus 
Fire on the Mountain
“I Want That Mountain” was the popular gospel song that expressed the vision of Dr. Jerry Falwell as he launched the new college in 1971. By that time, he was…
November 15, 2021 in Faith In Focus 
‘A vision unfolding in real time’
One of my mentors once said that it is not truth that transforms us, it is trusted truth that transforms. Meaning you can know something, but unless you truly trust…
June 21, 2021 in Faith In Focus 
Sold out for the mission
“He answered, ‘Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind,’ and ‘Love your neighbor…
March 25, 2021 in Faith In Focus 
A Legacy Foundation
Foundations! One of the most critical contributors to the continued growth and flourishing of any organization is its foundation. Once a foundation has been laid, it’s often hard, if not…
September 24, 2020 in Faith In Focus, Academics 
The College Years: Challenging the Mind and the Spirit
Liberty University School of Divinity Professor Dr. Lew Weider shares how critical thinking is essential to a well-rounded college education.
June 12, 2019 in Faith In Focus 
Faith in Focus: The Flame is Still Burning
Dr. David Wheeler says while many Christian institutions no longer understand the importance of emphasizing evangelism and the Great Commission as part of their required curriculum, the flame is still…
October 31, 2019 in Faith In Focus 
Ministry-Driven Impact
Liberty Baptist Theological Seminary remains largest seminary in the world. It began with a mere 41 students in 1975; it now hosts more than 10,000 students.
September 29, 2012 in Faith In Focus, Faith & Service 
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/article/in-first-visit-to-lu-gov-ron-desantis-wages-war-on-woke/","Standing before a packed arena during the April 14 Convocation, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis shared the importance of fighting for truth amid a culture that has seen the woke agenda rapidly gain ground in recent years.
“We have made Florida the state where woke goes to die,” he said. “The woke mind virus represents a war on merit. It represents a war on achievement. It’s a form of cultural Marxism that seeks to use identity politics to divide Americans. Perhaps most of all, the woke represents a war on the truth. As a leader, I don’t seek adulation. I don’t seek any fanfare. All I seek is the pursuit of the truth. Truth is enduring. As time goes by, the deceit and the lies fade away and what is true remains. Yes, the truth shall set you free. Because woke represents a war on truth, we must wage a war on woke.”
He said the consequences of living under left-leaning governmental rule are dire.
“States and cities that are governed by leftist politicians pursuing leftist ideology have seen crime skyrocket, they’ve seen their taxpayers abused, they’ve seen medical authoritarianism imposed, and they’ve seen core American principles discarded,” he said. “The woke agenda has caused millions of Americans to leave these jurisdictions for greener pastures. This has been a great exodus of Americans.”
Desantis was presented with an honorary doctorate by Liberty Provost and Chief Academic Officer Scott Hicks and Chancellor Jonathan Falwell.
DeSantis recounted his state’s progress under his leadership and his path to office. He won the gubernatorial election by a slim margin in 2018 and was reelected in a landslide in 2022.
“My view is very simple: I may have earned 50 percent of the vote (in 2018), but that entitled me to wield 100 percent of the executive power, and I intended to do that to advance an agenda that I believed was right for the state of Florida,” he said. “We would not do that agenda based on putting our finger in the wind or looking at polls. Leaders are not captive to poll results. Leaders set out a vision. Leaders execute that vision. And leaders deliver results, and when you do that, it doesn’t matter what the polls were before that; you can change public opinion. People will support you if they see you’re doing a good job.”
DeSantis said his efforts in the state of Florida will continue and that we must “insist on the restoration of time-tested Constitutional principles.”
“I am honored to be here, and I look forward to the battles ahead,” he said. “I will fight the good fight. I will finish the race. I will keep the faith.”
During the Convocation, DeSantis was presented an honorary Doctor of Humanities.
“Seeing the work that he’s doing and the fight that he’s fighting is very inspiring,” junior Jesse Hughes said. “Especially for a bunch of young students, some of whom like me want to go into politics … seeing somebody who is a leader and is implementing their faith in their leading, no matter what field you are going into, it is truly inspiring.”
Before DeSantis delivered his message, Chancellor Jonathan Falwell acknowledged Liberty’s longstanding history of welcoming influential voices to its stage.
“Going all the way back through our history, we have always had the opportunity of individuals coming from many different sectors in life to speak into the lives of our students. We have had presidents and we’ve had vice presidents. We have had senators and congressmen. We have had global business leaders. We have had the opportunity of hearing from professional athletes … lots of different educators and leaders who have come and who have brought wisdom to this idea of what it means to be a Champion for Christ.” 
Desantis met with students from the Helms School of Government during his visit.
Read more at Liberty.edu/News."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/section/presidents-viewpoint/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
President's Viewpoint Articles
Message from the President
Interim President Jerry Prevo delivers a charge to the Liberty community to boldly proclaim the Gospel and continue the university’s mission of Training Champions for Christ. …
June 22, 2023 in President's Viewpoint 
Message from the President
Interim President Jerry Prevo introduces an edition of the Liberty Journal that tells stories of students, faculty and staff, and alumni who are representing Christ in adherence with Liberty’s mission…
March 15, 2023 in President's Viewpoint 
Message from the President – Fall 2022
At Liberty University, our students are anything but ordinary; they are extraordinary. I am continually amazed and inspired by God’s work in and through them as they pursue His calling…
September 20, 2022 in President's Viewpoint 
Message from the President – Spring 2022
Our 50th Anniversary celebration continues on Liberty Mountain, and I am amazed daily by the work God is doing here in the lives of our students. They are excelling in…
April 20, 2022 in President's Viewpoint 
Message from the President
Fifty years ago, Liberty’s first students came to Lynchburg. They had heard the Rev. Jerry Falwell talk about this new school, and it was his words that inspired them. They…
November 15, 2021 in President's Viewpoint 
Message from the President
The 2020-21 academic year certainly presented us with challenges. We had to be creative and persistent to navigate a full year under the unprecedented limitations of COVID-19 mandates. But we…
June 21, 2021 in President's Viewpoint 
Message from the President
We are in the middle of an exciting spring semester at Liberty, and every day, Carol and I say that this campus just feels like home. We are getting to…
March 25, 2021 in President's Viewpoint 
In a time of transition, the mission remains unchanged
Season of Renewal: New president upholds his promise to carry out the original goal — Training Champions for Christ The IT tech stood quietly in the doorway, fidgeting with his…
September 24, 2020 in President's Viewpoint, News & Events 
President’s Viewpoint: The Dangerous Rise of the New Anti-Semitism in America
We cannot allow our country to return to the Dark Ages, and the rise of anti-Semitism is doing just that.
October 31, 2019 in President's Viewpoint 
Message from the President
A message from Liberty University President Jerry Falwell.
October 22, 2014 in President's Viewpoint 
Message from the President
A message from Liberty University President Jerry Falwell.
June 25, 2014 in President's Viewpoint, Academics 
Message from the President
The speech delivered by Liberty University President Jerry Falwell, Jr. at the grand opening of the Jerry Falwell Library.
February 19, 2014 in President's Viewpoint, News & Events 
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/section/academics/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Academics Articles
Sky-high Tech
Liberty University School of Aeronautics is leading the way in using the latest technological advancements to transform pilot training as it sends out graduates well-prepared to meet the industry’s growing…
March 15, 2023 in Academics 
Never too late: 88-year-old pursues his doctorate
Online student Duane Seitz takes classes toward a doctorate in ministry.
March 15, 2023 in Academics 
Faith-Focused Education
At a time when more families are turning to online education at all learning levels, Liberty University Online Academy has continued to expand its kindergarten through high school program, hitting…
March 15, 2023 in Academics 
Meet the Dean: Morse Tan
Liberty Law’s new dean is leading the mission to infiltrate the legal world with Christian advocates. …
September 20, 2022 in Academics 
Preserving the LU Story
The Jerry Falwell Library Archives is keeping the history of the university alive for future generations to explore. …
September 20, 2022 in Academics 
Leading Educators
School of Education graduates are using their advanced degrees to springboard into administration and impact elementary and secondary education at the top levels. …
September 20, 2022 in Academics 
Florida judge credits skills program with positioning her for success
Last spring, Rachel Myers (’11) landed her dream job when Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis appointed her to serve as judge in the Volusia County Court. …
September 20, 2022 in Academics, Alumni 
Based in D.C., graduate defends core values of the Christian faith
Jonathan Alexandre (’14) said Liberty Law was the primary training ground for his work as Senior Counsel for Government Affairs with Liberty Counsel. …
September 20, 2022 in Academics, Alumni 
Liberty Law: Here to Serve
Liberty University School of Law has a long tradition of serving the Lynchburg community and surrounding areas. Whether offering free tax services or representing underprivileged clients in the courtroom, their…
September 20, 2022 in Academics 
Students earn prestigious scholarships to travel abroad
Four students and one faculty member from different areas of the university have received Fulbright grants, and a Helms School of Government student has become to first Liberty student to…
September 20, 2022 in Academics, News & Events 
Collegiality
Edna Udobong, a professor in the Helms School of Government and Liberty’s Fulbright Program Advisor and Scholar Liaison, defines “collegiality” and how the the faculty of Liberty University embodies the…
September 20, 2022 in Academics, Scholar's Viewpoint 
New class of student-doctors welcomed during White Coat Ceremony
This year’s incoming students of Liberty University College of Osteopathic Medicine (LUCOM) took part in the annual White Coat Ceremony on July 30, a day when the student-doctors are encouraged…
September 20, 2022 in Academics, News & Events 
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/section/scholars-viewpoint/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Scholar's Viewpoint Articles
Our Natural Rights
Associate Professor of Government Aaron S. Van Allen traces the philosophical inspirations of America’s Founding Fathers and the concept of natural human rights. …
June 15, 2023 in Scholar's Viewpoint 
Setting the Stopping Point
Associate Dean of the School of Business and Executive Director of the Center for Financial Literacy Stacie Rhodes offers insights and advice about approaching personal finance with biblical wisdom.
March 15, 2023 in Scholar's Viewpoint 
Collegiality
Edna Udobong, a professor in the Helms School of Government and Liberty’s Fulbright Program Advisor and Scholar Liaison, defines “collegiality” and how the the faculty of Liberty University embodies the…
September 20, 2022 in Academics, Scholar's Viewpoint 
Simulating Genesis: Using physics-based modeling to illustrate the Bible’s reliability in science
Genesis 7:11-12 states, “ … the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken, and the windows of heaven were opened. And the rain was upon the…
April 18, 2022 in Scholar's Viewpoint 
The Inquisitive Christ
We all belong to the question. It haunts us. It possesses us, pressing us toward what we will never achieve: complete knowledge. We crave total eradication of doubt, so we…
March 25, 2021 in Scholar's Viewpoint 
Scholar’s Viewpoint: Resiliency is a necessary trait to carry into the workplace
Dean of Liberty’s School of Nursing shows how growing one’s faith builds resilience.
October 31, 2019 in Scholar's Viewpoint 
Abortion in America: A Jurisprudence of Contradiction
Liberty University School of Law professor Joseph Martins offers a moral framework to view the issue of abortion.
June 12, 2019 in Scholar's Viewpoint 
Christianity and the American University
While America’s earliest Christian colleges have abandoned their roots, Liberty University stands alone in fulfilling its promise to instill Christian principles in higher education.
February 26, 2019 in Faith & Service, Scholar's Viewpoint 
Standing on Solid Ground
Liberty University’s Christian mission remains unchanged, even amidst the major growth and expansion happening across campus.
October 31, 2018 in Academics, Scholar's Viewpoint 
Imagine This
The director of Liberty’s cinematic arts program shares his insight on today’s movie trends.
June 8, 2018 in Academics, Scholar's Viewpoint 
Examining the Significance of Jerusalem as Israel’s Capital
Distinguished Research Professor Dr. Randall Price reviews the facts from historical, religious, and political perspectives.
February 21, 2018 in Faith & Service, Scholar's Viewpoint 
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/section/student-life/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Student Life Articles
More than Talent
A gifted singer-songwriter studying in Liberty’s School of Music reflects on her experience on ‘America’s Got Talent’ last year and how she views her speech impediment.
June 22, 2023 in Student Life 
Be Our Guest: Meet LU’s Student Tour Guides
At Liberty, campus tours take on a family feel from the beginning. …
March 15, 2023 in Student Life 
Home Away from Home
To many of Liberty’s international students, the C. Daniel Kim International Student Center is more than just an office — it’s a second home.
March 15, 2023 in Student Life 
Campus construction projects moving along this spring
Multiple campus improvement projects greeted students when they returned for the start of the Spring 2023 semester.
March 15, 2023 in Student Life 
A Big, Hearty LU Welcome
New year brings new faces, same mission
September 20, 2022 in Student Life, News & Events 
Family Matters
The transition into one’s college years is felt by more than just the student. The Parent and Family Connections Office helps families at every step of the college path. …
September 20, 2022 in Student Life 
Intramurals help students strike balance between mind, body, and spirit
Liberty University’s Campus Recreation Department experienced record levels of participation in intramural sports last year with nearly 4,000 students competing on over 1,100 teams in 22 different sports. More than…
September 20, 2022 in Athletics, Student Life 
Saddle Up at LU
The Liberty Mountain Equestrian Center, located on 380 acres just minutes from main campus, has become one of the largest venues of its kind in Virginia. Meet the horses that…
September 20, 2022 in Student Life 
Want to launch a rocket or plant a garden? There’s a club for that.
With an ever-expanding selection of student clubs, Liberty University has multiple ways for students to enrich their campus life. Joining a club can help them cultivate their hobbies, celebrate ethnicity,…
April 26, 2022 in Student Life 
Blessing Our Neighbors
Liberty University students, faculty, and staff continue to serve as the hands and feet of Christ in Lynchburg and beyond DISASTER RELIEF: From Jan. 2-8, Liberty’s Serve Now program, in…
April 26, 2022 in Faith & Service, Student Life 
Remixing with the Best
Michael W. Smith Center for Commercial Music grows substantially with help from top industry professionals In a few short years, the Liberty University School of Music’s Michael W. Smith Center…
April 26, 2022 in Student Life 
It’s Good to be Home: Alumni help commemorate LU’s 50-year history during Homecoming 2021
Liberty University went full force in celebrating this year’s Homecoming, Oct. 8-9 — an occasion made even more special by the school’s 50th Anniversary. Guests enjoyed a stacked lineup of…
November 15, 2021 in Student Life, Alumni 
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/section/giving/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Giving Articles
Bream family leaves lasting imprint on Liberty Baseball
It was a family reunion of epic proportions on May 8 at the Liberty Baseball Stadium when more than 30 members of the Bream family, including 19 Liberty University graduates…
June 21, 2021 in Athletics, Alumni, Giving 
Parking garage named for area business owners
In March, Liberty University officially named its new parking garage on Campus East the Runk & Pratt Garage, recognizing the owners of Runk & Pratt Senior Living Communities for being…
June 21, 2021 in Alumni, Giving 
What Liberty is to me: A blessing and a home
Sometimes the biggest changes in our lives can become wonderful blessings. Nearly two years ago, God led me and my family to Liberty University, where I now have the privilege…
September 24, 2020 in Alumni, Giving 
Making the Miracle of Liberty University Happen
Liberty University alumnus Rod Gladfelter shares the story of chance encounter with a longtime Liberty supporter.
June 12, 2019 in Giving 
Graduates give back with Green Cord campaign
The Green Cord program is a great way for graduates to pay it forward to others coming along behind them.
June 8, 2018 in Giving 
Supporting the mission, leaving a legacy
Worth Harris Carter Jr. had a special place in his heart for Liberty University.
June 8, 2018 in Giving 
What’s in a Name?
An introduction to some of the generous supporters we can thank for our favorite spots around campus.
February 21, 2018 in Giving 
Keeping the Liberty Legacy Alive
Following in their parent’s footsteps, a new generation of students are creating their own stories at Liberty.
February 21, 2018 in Alumni, Giving 
Longtime employee helped thousands to partner in Liberty’s mission
For 35 years, Tom Arnold shared the story of Liberty University.
February 21, 2018 in Giving 
With Help From Donor, Law Graduate Finds His Calling in Southwest Virginia
As the Senior Assistant Commonwealth’s Attorney for Pittsylvania County in Virginia, Mark Hicks (’09, ’12) is grateful for the anonymous donor who made it possible.
October 11, 2017 in Alumni, Giving 
Rawlings Family Increases Donation to $12 Million
Together with brothers Harold and Carrol, The Rawlings Foundation has donated $12 million to Liberty in recent years.
October 11, 2017 in Giving 
Latest gift to Rawlings School of Divinity brings family’s total contribution to $10 million
Liberty University’s Rawlings School of Divinity received another huge financial boost from its namesake this spring. In March, the Rawlings family donated $3 million to the school, bringing the family’s…
June 1, 2017 in Giving 
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/journal/issue/fall-2021/","Explore Article Categories
In Coach's Words
Faith In Focus
President's Viewpoint
Academics
Faith & Service
Athletics
Student Life
Alumni
News & Events
Scholar's Viewpoint
Giving
Fall 2021 Issue
View the E-Magazine version of this issue View E-Magazine 
Message from the President
Fifty years ago, Liberty’s first students came to Lynchburg. They had heard the Rev. Jerry Falwell talk about this new school, and it was his words that inspired them. They…
November 15, 2021 in President's Viewpoint 
50 Years of Blessings
Liberty’s Golden Anniversary is well underway, with multiple opportunities to join the celebration The big 5-0. It marks a major milestone for anyone, whether blowing out candles on a cake,…
November 15, 2021 in News & Events 
New center will honor founder’s legacy and preserve the mission of Training Champions for Christ
On Oct. 8, the Friday of Homecoming, Liberty University announced plans for a major addition to the heart of campus that will honor the legacy of its founder, Jerry Falwell…
November 15, 2021 in Faith & Service, News & Events 
Not All Jokes Aside: Mark Lowry (’80) brings lessons and laughs in storied career
Mark Lowry’s greatest spiritual gift may be the gift of gab. Known for his humor and harmony, Lowry said he has used comedy as a ministry to reach more people…
November 15, 2021 in Alumni 
A Chat with Malik Willis: Liberty quarterback focuses on faith rather than fleeting fame
Calm, cool, and collected accurately describes Liberty University starting quarterback and national award contender Malik Willis. Coming off the 2020 season in which he led the Flames to an impressive…
November 15, 2021 in Athletics 
In Tune with the Mission, 50 years of music ministry at Liberty
Because of a strong belief in a magnificent vision cast before them in the school’s early years, Liberty University music faculty willingly worked out of small storage closets while their…
November 15, 2021 in Academics, Faith & Service 
From His Own Hand
The masthead for the print version of this magazine, “LIBERTY JOURNAL,” appears in a handwriting-style font. The custom font was created especially for Liberty’s 50th Anniversary celebration and replicates the…
November 15, 2021 in News & Events 
News anchor Shannon Bream (’93) on finding light in the darkness of depression
Shannon Bream (’93), anchor for “FOX News @ Night,” helped kick off Homecoming during the Oct. 8 Convocation. Even though she has risen to broadcast journalism fame, Bream said she…
November 15, 2021 in Alumni 
Back at it: Basketball squads fired up for second season in Liberty Arena, this time with full fan capacity
Excitement abounds for the Liberty men’s and women’s basketball teams heading into the 2021-22 season. The Flames and Lady Flames enjoyed a successful inaugural season at Liberty Arena, going a…
November 15, 2021 in Athletics 
Where in the World: Graduates extend Liberty’s footprint across the globe
“Maintaining the vision of the founder, Dr. Jerry Falwell, Liberty University develops Christ-centered men and women with the values, knowledge, and skills essential to impact the world. “Through its residential…
November 15, 2021 in Alumni 
Newly renovated weight room pays homage to Men of Armour ministry
The newly renovated weight room in the Liberty Football Center (LFC) has officially been named the Men of Armour Football Alumni Weight Room, after an evangelistic ministry led by the…
November 15, 2021 in Athletics, News & Events 
Co-founder Dr. Elmer Towns shares memories of first chapel message in 1971
With the Vines Center packed with Homecoming guests on Friday, Oct. 8, and the university in the midst of celebrating its 50th Anniversary, it was fitting to welcome the speaker…
November 15, 2021 in Faith & Service 
Get the e-magazine straight to your inbox!
It only takes a click to unsubscribe."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/parents/spiritual-growth/","Since 1971, Liberty University has had one mission — Training Champions for Christ.
It’s what drives everything we do.
It’s how we work to build a better world.
If faith is important to you, chances are you’ve spent years planting seeds of faith in your child. Their spiritual development matters to you — a lot.
When you’re on Liberty’s campus, you’ll find a group of people who serve one another with grace and strive to cultivate a culture that is Christ-like and community-focused.
As a Christ-centered community, we prioritize the spiritual health of our students. It’s part of our commitment to carrying on the work you began.
We provide resources and relationships to help your child grow in their faith as well as a safe environment for them to solidify what they believe.
So your student can go out and build a better world — as a Champion for Christ.
The Liberty Worship Collective is a team of student worship leaders who regularly invite the student body into times of praise during Convocation and Campus Community.
Liberty provides ample opportunities for students to grow spiritually through worship and discipleship.
Where will your son or daughter find spiritual input at LU?
The classroom | All courses are taught from a biblical worldview by professors who are committed to their faith and to mentoring their students.
Their dorm | Our 5:1 ratio of students to peer leaders on every hall means that your son or daughter will be living everyday life with people who choose to build Gospel-centered community and live on mission with Jesus.
Their sports team | Coaches, assistant coaches, strength 
coaches — they understand the most important training their student-athletes receive is as a Champion for Christ, and their personal investment in their teams show it.
CSER (community service) | Serving one another is not only something God asks us to do — it’s something that’s good for you. Your child’s life will be enriched by the many opportunities they’re given to serve others.
Convocation | Though our guest speakers come from a variety of personal and professional backgrounds, every Convocation begins with a time of worship.
Campus Community | Liberty’s weekly “church” service on Wednesday evenings is a time of refreshment, encouragement, and Bible-focused teaching. 
Their friends | While no community is perfect, the overall culture at Liberty is positive and encouraging, filled with people who want to inspire one another and be part of something greater than themselves.
Their phone | The Liberty Today mobile app offers a wealth of useful information about what’s going on around campus — and it’s where your son or daughter can request prayer from our team of 24/7 prayer warriors.
The Liberty Worship Collective leads worship during Convocation and Campus Community
“After this weekend, I can tell you that Liberty is a unique and wonderful place! We attended a class in Family and Child Development with Dr. Ritchie, and she spent 15 out of a 50-minute class reading and discussing John 15, and then she prayed. Wow. I’ve never been to a school that so clearly integrates faith and learning.” 
– Elizabeth M., Prospective LU Mom 
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find a welcoming environment that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to our values helped us rank as Niche.com’s #2 most conservative college in America.
Think Liberty will be a great fit?
Submit Enrollment Deposit 
Lock in the highest possible scholarship amount for your student by submitting a refundable Enrollment Deposit today!
Worship through Campus Community
Campus Community is the central gathering place for worship and spiritual growth at Liberty. Students draw closer to Christ every Wednesday night through this worship service centered around God’s Word.
Want to watch Campus Community for yourself?
Download the LU Today mobile app and go to the “Campus Community” page — previous services are available on-demand.
Follow Liberty University Office of Spiritual Development on Facebook to watch Campus Community live.
Grow as a disciple of Christ through the LU Shepherds
The LU Shepherd Office focuses on the spiritual needs of the student body, offering guidance, discipleship, and soul-care.
Eleven full-time LU Shepherds (five male and six female — one is dedicated exclusively to our student-athletes) provide pastoral care to the Liberty student body.
Students praying together in their Community Group"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/parents/safety-and-support/","You Care Deeply About Your Child’s Safety. So Do We.
Numbers to Know
Contact the Liberty University Police Department:
Non-Emergency Call: (434) 592-7641
Emergency Call: (434) 592-3911
Liberty University has also implemented an emergency notification system that we can use to alert you in the event of certain situations on campus – including school closings, severe weather, and life-threatening situations.
The emergency alert system is open to all members of the Liberty University community with a Liberty account. Students can also sign up other individuals, such as a parent or spouse, to receive alerts under their account. Learn more about how your child can sign up for emergency alerts.
Additionally, we have multiple emergency blue light call boxes across campus to help ensure the highest safety and security measures. When a button on the emergency blue light pole is pressed, the lights go into strobe mode – and a special camera is activated to provide live-stream video to the Liberty University Emergency Communications Dispatch Center. A dispatcher can send emergency personnel while monitoring and communicating with the individual in distress via the call box.
See our student safety brochure for more information about what we’re doing to keep our campus safe!
Did You Know?
Students can sign up to receive email or text alerts from Liberty’s emergency alert system.
Students can sign up to receive email or text alerts from Liberty’s emergency alert system.
Liberty was ranked among the top 3 safest college campuses in Virginia – and among the top 10% of safest college campuses in the U.S. by Niche.com.
Creating a Safe, Secure, and Supportive Campus Is Our Priority
Liberty was ranked in the top 10% of safest college campuses in the United States by Niche.com. Here are just some of the ways Liberty is working to keep your student safe and supported:
Liberty’s police department is staffed by highly trained professionals who provide 24/7 active police support.
Students can request a police escort across campus at any time by calling the LUPD non-emergency number.
Our emergency blue light call boxes across campus help connect students to emergency dispatchers with the press of a single button.
Every residence hall and dormitory is badge-access only.
Our nightly curfew helps ensure that all on-campus students are safe and accounted for.
One-on-one counseling appointments and group support sessions are available to all students.
Students can report concerning behavior (such as suicidal thoughts, substance abuse, and overly aggressive behavior) to Liberty’s CARE Team to be resourced appropriately.
The Speak Up campaign through the Office of Equity and Compliance/Title IX allows students to report instances of sexual harassment, discrimination, and assault.
Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America
Important Resources
Campus Police
Liberty’s Police Department provides safety training, text alerts, and a fully staffed police force.
Discover the many ways Liberty continues to invest in campus safety.
Learn more >
Student Care & Counseling
LU students have access to professional counseling, group support, and wellness seminars.
Find out how your child can be supported, no matter what life brings their way.
Learn more >
Equity & Compliance/Title IX
Liberty University does not tolerate sexual harassment, exploitation, or discrimination.
Explore how Liberty is taking a stand to protect the well-being of individuals on our campus.
Learn more >
CARE Team
Students can report concerning behaviors to the CARE Team, who will work to handle the situation appropriately.
See how the CARE Team helps create a safe, accountable campus.
Learn more >
Disability Accommodation Support
The Office of Disability Accommodation Support (ODAS) helps provide equal access to students with disabilities.
Explore how ODAS strives to help students grow and thrive.
Learn more >
Equity & Inclusion
Inclusion, equality, non-discrimination, and cultural competency are important to us.
See how being united by a common faith sets us free to celebrate our differences as brothers and sisters in Christ.
Learn more >
We’ll Be Here for Your Child – Even When You’re Miles Away
You’ve been protecting your child their entire life. Passing that baton to someone — anyone — else is not an easy thing to do.
And wanting to make sure your son or daughter is okay when they go off to college is natural as a parent. Rest assured that at Liberty University, we take your child’s safety very seriously.
Our full-service law enforcement agency continually monitors campus safety protocols and updates them as often as needed. Our student counseling services work hand-in-hand with university and local professionals to provide the holistic care that students may need.
Part of our mission of Training Champions for Christ is creating a culture where students protect one another, stand up for one another, and refuse to tolerate harassment, discrimination, or assault.
So whether it’s safeguarding campus through security measures and training or walking beside them through a painful season, we’re committed to protecting the well-being of each and every student."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/degrees/associate/","Jumpstart Your Career by Earning an Associate Degree
We know that you’re excited about the opportunity to become a professional in your field. Maybe you’re interested in the medical field, business, or aviation. Perhaps you want to pursue psychology, criminal justice, or education. We have all of these associate degrees available to you and more!
Throughout your degree, you’ll be taught from a Christian perspective, which can help prepare you to enter your career field with integrity, as well as a well-rounded education. You’ll also make professional connections and have opportunities for hands-on experience in any areas of study you choose.
So what are you waiting for? Here at Liberty, you can earn your associate degree in just two years. So start your educational journey today by pursuing one of our associate degrees.

Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Available Degree Programs by School
School of Aeronautics
College of Applied Studies and Academic Success (CASAS)
College of Arts and Sciences
Helms School of Government"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/parents/making-a-difference/","At Liberty, we’re training people — not just professionals.
Because we believe an education isn’t complete if it ignores teaching students how to make things right in the world or giving them the chance to do it themselves.
Here, students give over half a million volunteer hours every year — the equivalent of a nearly $3 million investment in the local community.
Our own humanitarian aid organization, LU Serve Now, can mobilize staff and students to hit the ground within days of a crisis, bringing help and hope to those in the midst of tragedy.
Having priorities that include being a voice for the voiceless, fighting for the oppressed, and bringing healing to the hurting will make any job applicant stand out as the person — not just the professional — you’d want on your team.
Liberty students serving communities around the world
Think Liberty will be a great fit?
Submit Enrollment Deposit 
Lock in the highest possible scholarship amount for your student by submitting a refundable Enrollment Deposit today!
Local Outreach
Our students aren’t waiting to act like the Church when they graduate and leave Liberty – they are living as the Church right now.
Learn about the many ways students make a lasting impact on the Lynchburg community by volunteering on a regular basis.
Learn more >
Global Outreach
Liberty is leading the way in training students — from all academic fields — in areas like disaster relief, anti-human trafficking, orphan care, food and water distribution, and poverty alleviation.
Learn about our recent crisis response trips and how your student can be involved in bringing tangible help and healing to victims of unexpected disasters.
Learn more >
Leading nonprofit employers like Samaritan’s Purse seek out Liberty students for their academic excellence and their commitment to serving others.
The Value of Volunteering
Employers are not just looking for a great education or a great résumé – they want to hire great people.
They’re looking for candidates who exhibit adaptability, flexibility, honesty, teamwork, dependability, willingness to listen and learn, critical thinking, and good communication skills.
They’re looking for candidates who exhibit adaptability, flexibility, honesty, teamwork, dependability, willingness to listen and learn, critical thinking, and good communication skills.
Volunteer opportunities help students cultivate these traits and are an intentional part of the Liberty experience. 
Volunteer coordinators regularly report that our students exceed expectations, have better attitudes than adult volunteers, and over-deliver.
Many times, students are volunteering using the technical skills they learn in their degree programs, like sound engineering, technical production, or program development. 
Liberty students serve at over 1,500 organizations per year.
They give over half a million hours in volunteer service every year. 
One program – Campus Serve – was started in 2002, and about 150 students continue to serve Lynchburg every week through work projects, children’s ministry, elderly care, and poverty alleviation.
Liberty’s humanitarian aid organization, LU Send, has sent teams to provide immediate disaster relief to places like California, Puerto Rico, Texas, Antigua, Cuba, and Mexico.
What are some ways Liberty students and staff are making changes in the world?
Liberty’s Habitat for Humanity Club has raised money for and built three homes since 2014 — and just received their second $20,000 grant from State Farm Insurance to begin their fourth. The only other school to have received the grant back-to-back was Clemson University.
Law students provide free tax filing help to low-income families every year. 
Medical students provide free physicals, flu shots, mammograms, and mental health and vision screenings during community clinics in underserved areas every year. 
The Liberty University Habit for Humanity Club helps build homes for those who need them the most.
Operation Christmas Child
Every year, Liberty students participate in Operation Christmas Child. Thousands of shoeboxes are distributed in September, packed and prayed over by the students, and collected in October during the Liberty University Shoebox Blitz.
In Fall 2019, over 2,400 shoeboxes were assembled and donated — one dorm packed nearly 270 boxes in a single evening!
And over the past year…
Liberty University partnered with Unclaimed Baggage and HumanKind in the Fall 2019 semester to distribute 308 suitcases to foster children in Central Virginia. Unclaimed Baggage donated the suitcases, then Liberty students decorated them and purchased hygiene kits, blankets, and toys to pack inside.
Over 100 students packed more than 1,000 backpacks through LU Serve Food Disparity workshop as part of Food for Thought’s backpack program, providing underprivileged Lynchburg City School students with weekend meals.
Sodexo, Liberty’s dining services provider, and the local Food Lion also donated a combined 3,450 pounds of food, filling 490 additional backpacks.
Liberty’s football team used the Thanksgiving season to buy and personally deliver special meals to roughly 12 different families. During the final game of the regular season, they collected 10 bins of canned food for Lynchburg Daily Bread (a local food pantry).
Liberty sent faculty, staff, and students on 24 trips during Spring Break 2019. Projects included preparing housing for incoming refugees in Spain, teaching music to children in Nicaragua, and providing trauma counseling for sex trafficking victims in India.
In both 2018 and 2019, Family and Consumer Sciences students raised more than $4,000 for local organizations and nonprofits through class projects.
Over 6,000 diapers and 80 baby items were collected during Liberty’s Law Students for Life Club 2019 prayer breakfast to be donated to the Blue Ridge Pregnancy Center.
“There are so many types of devastation, and each of them reveals this is such a broken world. Being exposed to these types of hurt and brokenness is sobering, and it changes the way that you live.
It’s humbling to realize what you have — and to be grateful for it. It’s a privilege to be intentional and respond by becoming part of the aid and relief.”
— Holly Griswold, associate director of LU Serve Now
“One of the biggest benefits of the trip [to Rwanda] was seeing the faith of others that had endured through crisis. I was speaking to our amazing translator, Justin, who is now a dear friend of mine. He was a young child during the Rwandan genocide and lost all of his family members.
I asked him what he did when he doubted God. He looked at me confused, “What do you mean?” I repeated my question, and he responded “I never doubted God.” He didn’t say this in a prideful manner, he was just thoroughly confused by the concept of doubting God in the midst of trials because his view of God did not change based on circumstances.
This trip deepened my view of reconciliation and forgiveness to a level I didn’t even know existed.”
— Brooke S., psychology student
“Serving in Nepal showed me (in a way I could not have received through a textbook) that I don’t have to take small bites of the possible — through Christ, I can embark on the impossible.”
—Amy R.
."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/contact-us/","Liberty has taught me how big the world is and how many opportunities there are out there. I have met so many authentic people that embody how the Lord cares for each of us and seen how Liberty is life-giving and perspective-broadening in terms of possibility.""
– Sarah Blanke ‘19, B.S. in Fashion Design and Business Entrepreneurship"
"https://www.liberty.edu/terms-and-conditions","Texting Terms and Conditions
Please read these terms and conditions of service carefully before you launch mobile products, services or applications provided by Liberty University. These terms and conditions of service represent the agreement (“Agreement”) between you and Liberty University, Inc. (“Liberty University”) with respect to the Liberty University application service (the “Liberty University Service” or “Service”). All references herein to “you” and “your” means you, your employees, agents, and contractors, and any other entity on whose behalf you accept these terms and conditions, all of whom shall also be bound by this Agreement. Your use of the Liberty University Service indicates that you accept these terms and conditions. If you do not accept these terms and conditions, do not launch or otherwise use the Liberty University application.
Liberty University may revise these terms and conditions at any time, with or without notice to you. You should visit Liberty.edu from time to time to review the then-current terms and conditions of the Liberty University Service.
Liberty University’s SMS Service
The Liberty University SMS Service interacts with you by delivering content, information, promotional offerings, coupons, etc. to your mobile device. There is no monthly fee associated with the use of this service; however, text messaging and data charges billed by your carrier may apply. Liberty University subscribers will receive around 5 messages a month, determined by the contact requests from the subscribers.
Liberty University has an SMS service for parking notifications at our Parking Garages from our short codes 24515 and 24502.
Note: You will receive one message with an information about the parking situation per opt in.
Liberty University Online Academy Enrollment SMS Promotions – 88741
LUOA will contact those that inquire, apply, or are enrolled with promotions for scholarships or fee applications.
You can cancel the SMS service at any time. Just text STOP to the short code. After you send the SMS message STOP to us, we will send you an SMS message to confirm that you have been unsubscribed. After this, you will no longer receive SMS messages from us. If you want to join again, just sign up as you did the first time and we will start sending SMS messages to you again.
If you are experiencing issues with the messaging program you can reply with the keyword HELP for more assistance, or you can get help directly at LUOAInfo@liberty.edu
Carriers are not liable for delayed or undelivered messages.
As always, message and data rates may apply for any messages sent to you from us and to us from you. Message frequency varies based on enrollment; up to six messages per month. If you have any questions about your text plan or data plan, it is best to contact your wireless provider.
If you have any questions regarding privacy, please read our privacy policy: https://www.liberty.edu/offices/privacy-policy/
A complete description of the Liberty University Services is available on Liberty University’s website, located at Liberty.edu and our privacy policy.
LU Votes SMS Service
LU Votes SMS Promotions – 48683
Liberty University will contact those that subscribe to the Pray Think Vote initiative with SMS information related to voter resources, registration, and events.
You can cancel the SMS service at any time. Just text STOP to the short code. After you send the SMS message STOP to us, we will send you an SMS message to confirm that you have been unsubscribed. After this, you will no longer receive SMS messages from the Pray Think Vote campaign. If you want to join again, just sign up as you did the first time and we will start sending SMS messages to you again.
If you are experiencing issues with the messaging program you can reply with the keyword HELP for more assistance, or you can get help directly at vote@liberty.edu
Carriers are not liable for delayed or undelivered messages.
As always, message and data rates may apply for any messages sent to you from us and to us from you. Message frequency may vary. If you have any questions about your text plan or data plan, it is best to contact your wireless provider.
If you have any questions regarding privacy, please read our privacy policy: https://www.liberty.edu/offices/privacy-policy/
A complete description of the Liberty University Services is available on Liberty University’s Terms & Conditions page and our Privacy Policy.
Opt-Out
You can cancel your receipt of mobile alerts at any time by texting the word STOP to the 24502 or 24515.
For assistance, text HELP to the 24502 or 24515 for more SMS service information or you can reach us at sms2@liberty.edu.
Message and data rates may apply.
You can cancel the SMS service at any time. Just text “STOP” to the short code. After you send the SMS message “STOP” to us, we will send you an SMS message to confirm that you have been unsubscribed.
After this, you will no longer receive SMS messages from us. If you want to join again, just sign up as you did the first time and we will start sending SMS messages to you again.
For privacy policies, visit our web page.
For more information, call 866-447-2869.
All costs associated with receiving a text message are the responsibility of the individual receiving the message. A list of carriers that are currently supported include but are not limited to AT&T, Sprint, Verizon Wireless, U.S. Cellular, Cellular One, Virgin Mobile, Boost, T-Mobile, Cricket, U.S. Cellular, Google Voice, and Ntelos. Check with your mobile operator for details on receiving text messages (SMS). Carriers are not liable for delayed or undelivered messages
Your Location & Other Personal Information
Additionally, the Liberty University Service may collect Personally Identifiable Information (“PII”). PII is information that can be directly associated with a specific person or entity and may include your name, mobile phone number, mailing address, date of birth, graduation year and email address. The Liberty University Service may also collect information about your wireless device type, the name of your wireless carrier, the types of interactions and transactions you invoke in response to the Liberty University Service, and your preferences. This is Non-Personally Identifiable Information (“Non-PII”) and this is used to improve the Service to deliver more relevant content and marketing messages, as well as to measure the effectiveness of information, content, and promotional offers. PII and Non-PII information are subject to Liberty University’s privacy policy. Your use of the Liberty University Service indicates that you accept the terms of Liberty University’s privacy policy.
Safe & Lawful Use of the Liberty University Service
You agree to comply with the following when using the Liberty University Service:
You may not use the Liberty University Service for any illegal, unauthorized, unintended, unsafe, hazardous, or unlawful purposes, or in any manner inconsistent with this Agreement.
You may not use the Liberty University Service while operation.
Telephone Charges
You are responsible for any fees assessed by your wireless telephone carrier to access the Liberty University Service, including any data plan charges, text messaging charges, tolls, out-of-area roaming, or other telephone connection charges.
Termination
Liberty University reserves the right to terminate your access to the Liberty University Service at any time for any or no reason and without notice to you.
You may terminate the Liberty University Service at any time by (i) text messaging “STOP” to “24502 or 24515,” (ii) emailing sms2@liberty.edu, (iii) sending a letter to Liberty University, 1971 University Blvd, Lynchburg, Virginia, 24515, or (iv) calling Liberty University Customer Support at (888) 308-7110 (Ext. 101). Any such cancellation by you will become effective when processed by Liberty University. Upon any termination of your Liberty University Service, Liberty University will have no liability to you or any further obligations under this Agreement.
Disclaimers
To the fullest extent permissible pursuant to applicable law, in no event will Liberty University, its licensors and suppliers, or agents or employees of any of the foregoing, be liable for any decision made or action was taken by you or anyone else in reliance on the information provided by the Liberty University Service. You are responsible for the entire risk arising out of your use of the Liberty University Service.
The Liberty University Service is provided “as is” and without warranties of any kind either express or implied. Liberty University disclaims all warranties, express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of merchantability, non-infringement, and fitness for a particular purpose.
Limitation of Liability
To the extent permitted by law, under no circumstances will Liberty University or its licensors (or their licensors and suppliers) be liable to you or anyone else for any loss, injury, or damages (including but not limited to any compensatory, punitive, special, incidental, indirect, exemplary or consequential damages) arising out of or in connection with the use by you or anyone else of the Liberty University Service, any defects in the Liberty University Service, or any breach of this Agreement, even if Liberty University or its licensors have been advised of the possibility of such damages.
Applicable law may not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability or incidental or consequential damages, so the above exclusion may not apply to you.
Indemnification
To the extent permitted by applicable law, you agree to indemnify, defend and hold Liberty University and its licensors (including their respective licensors, suppliers, assignees, subsidiaries, affiliated companies, and the respective officers, directors, employees, shareholders, agents and representatives of each of them) free and harmless from and against any liability, loss, injury (including injuries resulting in death), demand, action, cost, expense, or claim of any kind or character, including but not limited to attorney’s fees, arising out of or in connection with your use of the Liberty University Service.
Governing Law; Forum Selecting
This Agreement and performance hereunder will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia without giving effect to its conflict of law provisions. You agree to submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of courts sitting in Lynchburg, Virginia. Any action arising from this Agreement must be brought in a court sitting in Lynchburg, Virginia.
Miscellaneous
This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between Liberty University and you with respect to the subject matter hereof. Liberty University’s or your failure to require performance of any provision will not affect that party’s right to require performance at any time thereafter, nor will a waiver of any breach or default of this Agreement constitute a waiver of any subsequent breach or default or a waiver of the provision itself. If any provision herein is held unenforceable, then such provision will be ignored, and the remaining provisions of this Agreement will remain in full force and effect.
You may not resell, assign, or transfer any of your rights hereunder. Any such attempt may result in termination of this Agreement, without liability to Liberty University. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Liberty University may assign this Agreement to any affiliate, successor company or third party company at any time without notice.
By using the Liberty University Service, you consent to receive from Liberty University all communications, including notices, agreements, legally required disclosures or other information in connection with the Liberty University Service (collectively, “Notices”) electronically. Liberty University may provide such Notices by posting them on Liberty University’s website or by sending such Notices to your wireless device. If you desire to withdraw your consent to receive Notices electronically, you must discontinue your use of the Liberty University Service.
If you have any questions regarding the terms of this Agreement, please contact Liberty University via (i) email at sms2@liberty.edu, (ii) mail at Liberty University, 1971 University Blvd, Lynchburg, Virginia, 24515, or (iii) phone at 866-447-2869."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/academics/leadership-training/","Knowing how to lead — and to lead well — is a skill vital to success in today’s workplace.
Leaders inspire others.
They bring about change.
They draw people together with a shared vision and empower them to do big things.
But unethical leaders put societies and communities at risk. At Liberty, we’re intentional about training you to lead well, to serve others with integrity, and to be the next generation of national and global leaders.
So if you want to become an executive leader, a team leader, a church leader, or a leader in your home, you can choose from multiple leadership tracks designed to teach you how to use your influence — and inspire others to make lasting change.
The Converge Leadership Program can help you get the leadership training and professional skills you need to become an effective leader.
The leaders of tomorrow are in the classroom today.
Learn how Liberty can prepare you to lead in any environment.
Apply NowRequest Info
Community Leadership Training
Join the Eagle Scholars
The Eagle Scholars Program is a community of high-achieving* students who receive specialized training in personal and professional development so they can become leaders throughout college and beyond.
Students are trained in connecting with others, self-leadership, leading others, and changing culture.
Leadership Courses
Want to add leadership to your transcript or résumé? These leadership classes perfectly supplement any degree program:
LEAD 110 — Introduction to Leadership: Connecting with Others
LEAD 112 — Self-Leadership Development
LEAD 210 — The Art and Science of Leading Others
LEAD 212 — The Art and Science of Changing Culture
Join the Converge Leadership Program
Get the leadership training and professional skills you need through development workshops, competency-based small groups, and peer mentorship. You’ll be equipped to confidently lead wherever life takes you.
Become an RA
RAs are highly motivated individuals with a strong work ethic who help maintain the integrity of our housing facilities while building community.
Interested? RA leadership training is designed to prepare you for your future career with practical leadership training and hands-on experience.
Spiritual Leadership Training 
Community Group Leaders (CGLs)
Community groups are held weekly, on Wednesday nights following Campus Community. Centered on prayer, Bible study, and spiritual encouragement, gathering in smaller groups allows students to ask the question, “How does the truth we all heard in Campus Community apply in my life?”
Resident Shepherds
Want to help your peers dive even deeper in their relationship with Christ? Resident Shepherds serve the students on their residence halls by nurturing spiritual development and maturity through elevating the priority of Gospel-centered discipleship — giving expression to love for God, love for one another, and love for the nations."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/academics/practical-learning/","Getting a degree is about getting prepared for the future.
It’s taking a look at your natural gifts, your passions, the topics you love to explore, the ideas that challenge you, and the problems you want to fix — and channeling them into a career you’ll love.
It’s also using the best tools available to do it. Each degree program at Liberty is developed with you — and what you’ll need to succeed — in mind.
So while you’ll discuss big ideas, read important works, and grow intellectually in the classroom, you’ll also be taught the things you can’t learn in books.
You’ll learn about the tools and simulators that professionals use, and in many cases, learn from the pros themselves.
Learning here is like learning on the job — before you’re on the job. 
Want to…
Start your own business? Check out our Center for Entrepreneurship.
Record your own music? We’ve got a studio — and a record label — for that.
Graduate with an IMDb credit or a professional theatre credit on your résumé? Opportunities to earn them come standard in our Cinematic Arts and Theatre curriculums.
Take a look at just a few of the opportunities you’ll have for practical learning and professional experience at Liberty University.
“Liberty is telling me that they care about my education. To actually put this much money, resources, and staff time into a professional studio where students get to work — shows that they are willing to take that next step to prepare us for the job market.
It gives me the right to say, ‘Hey, I’ve used this equipment that you are using.’ I can go into job interviews at studios and say, ‘I’m familiar with this, I’ve worked with this in college, and I’ve run productions on it.’”
— Jason Johnson, digital media student
Aeronautics
Ready to fly? At Liberty, you’ll benefit from our airline hiring agreements with at least nine airlines — including ExpressJet and Piedmont Airlines — and you’ll learn to be a pilot, airplane mechanic, or drone operator using our:
27 aircraft (including 20 Cessna 172 SP Skyhawks, 5 Piper PA-44 Seminoles, and 2 Cessna 150s)
13 training devices (including an advanced jet training device)
6 unmanned aerial vehicles (drones)
We also have over 65 flight training affiliates across the country, so you can get your flight time and work on your B.S. in Aviation online no matter where you are.
The Arts
Ever dreamed of having your artwork displayed in a gallery? Or working on a film slated for national release? Or performing on stage in a professional musical? Liberty students enjoy these opportunities and more — every year.
The Liberty University Art Gallery features 13-foot ceilings, track lighting, and a professional hanging system to beautifully display student art, visiting artist exhibitions, and Liberty’s permanent art collection.
The Alluvion Stage Company is a nonprofit, professional theater company where students have the opportunity to perform alongside seasoned stage professionals and perform in Liberty’s 640-seat Tower Theater.
The Cinematic Arts, Zaki Gordon Center not only holds its own film festival every year, but also invites industry professionals to regularly speak to students like…
Hybrid Learning
At Liberty University, we understand there are as many learning styles and preferences as there are students, and a one-size-fits-all education is an outdated model.
So while classes on campus will give you the real world experience and mentorship you want, you can also earn class credit through our easily accessible online courses.
Online classes are 8 weeks long
There are 8 online start dates per year
Online courses run parallel to the residential academic calendar
Online classes meet the same rigorous academic standards as our residential courses, and taking courses online to supplement an on-campus program is a popular option for many students.
Doing so gives you the freedom to study interesting subjects outside your major, get ahead over the summer, work while you study, or simply earn your degree faster.
Please note: First-semester freshmen and transfer students are not eligible for online classes. 
Communication
Do you see media in your future? Whether you want to be in front of the camera or behind it, you’ll gain real broadcast experience by working with Liberty’s professional event production team, covering live campus events, like Convocation. You’ll also benefit from:
Two broadcast studios, complete with:
Professional-grade sets with digital backgrounds and a green screen
Production control rooms connected via fiber-optic cable to a number of campus venues for live sports productions (some of which are covered by ESPN)
LFSN (Liberty Flames Sports Network)
Cover Liberty’s sporting events with a network that reaches into 40 million households coast-to-coast
Work with a broadcast team consisting of trained professionals who have worked for most of the major sports networks in the United States — including ESPN, ABC Sports, CBS Sports, NBC Sports, NASCAR, SportSouth, Comcast, and Fox Sports
90.9 The Light
Liberty’s student-run radio station reaches up to 200,000 potential listeners in Lynchburg and surrounding counties.
It broadcasts Christian music and Liberty University athletics.
90.9 The Light staffs 12 managers and gives hands-on experience to nearly 100 students.
The Liberty Champion Newspaper
Build your portfolio as you enjoy interview opportunities with high-profile leaders, and learn how to meet real-story deadlines in news, sports, feature, and editorial writing.
The Liberty Champion is one of the largest weekly community papers in Central Virginia.
It’s published 11 times each semester and circulated through various community channels with 15,500 copies printed per issue.
“Having that hands-on experience, I’m able to show what I learned in textbooks in real-life situations. It (the classroom and LFSN experience) gives me a demo reel so I can actually show off my work. Instead of just telling people, ‘I know how to do it,’ I can say, ‘I used this equipment, and this is what I learned with that.’ … It makes me look better to a future employer, and it just gives me the confidence that I know what I’m doing.”
— Julie S., digital media student
Biology and Chemistry
Ready to make the next big scientific discovery?
At Liberty, you’ll be able to do research in 20 major-specific teaching labs and 6 research labs — including a forensic science lab, genetics lab, environmental biology lab, and cadaver lab (open to select undergraduate biomedical science students).
You’ll also learn on professional-level research equipment like these:
“Adapting is always part of the drill. Sometimes things don’t go according to plan, but that’s why it’s important for our students to be prepared to respond in a dynamic environment and be prepared if something goes wrong.”
— Andrew Walton, Liberty Aeronautics’ Director of Safety
Disaster Simulations
Crisis situations are stressful enough — and navigating one for the first time as a professional can be nerve-wracking.
So, at Liberty, departments across disciplines collaborate with each other and with professionals to give students practice for real-world crises in controlled environments.
Just this year, students learned how to respond to a bioterrorism attack and a plane crash.
Simulated Bioterrorism Attack
SIMULATION: Fog was released inside Liberty’s Indoor Track & Field Complex to simulate the spread of deadly viruses and biological agents, such as anthrax and Ebola. Additionally, a fake laboratory was created for students to learn more about dangerous bacteria that terrorists manipulate in order to cause mass destruction.
Forensic science, criminal justice, biology, and nursing students worked together with the Virginia State Police, Lynchburg Fire Department, the Liberty University Police Department, and the U.S. Army National Guard 34th and 229th units to learn what roles the different law enforcement agencies play in the event of an attack.
“I didn’t expect to be doing stuff like this as a freshman, so it’s been really cool having all these opportunities presented to me right off the bat.” 
— Faith S., student
“It’s not real, but it feels real. I’m glad that Liberty has the resources like this to put a drill together where we can gain experience.”
— Lauren E., exercise science student
Simulated Airplane Crash
SIMULATION: A small prop plane “crashed” into a crowd of people attending an airshow.
Nursing and aviation students played the roles of airport representatives, first responders, Red Cross representatives, and victims. Nursing students tended to the 12 crash victims, while aviation students worked to secure the scene and investigate the incident."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/degrees/bachelors/minors/","Get more out of your degree by adding a minor.
Maybe you’re a business major interested in aeronautics, or you’re majoring in studio art and interested in criminal justice. Perhaps you’d like to study an additional discipline within your school or major, like adding a theology minor to your youth ministries degree.
With a minor (or two), you can tailor your degree to fit your interests and your future career. Check out all of Liberty’s residential minors below, or take a look at the Residential Minor Completion Plans for detailed information.
Browse available minors by Liberty’s schools and colleges:
Or browse by area of interest:

Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Aeronautics
Aeronautics
Aviation Safety
Unmanned Aerial Systems Operator
Back to List ^
Applied Studies and Academic Success
Technical Studies
Back to List ^
Arts and Sciences
American Sign Language
Arabic
Chinese
Creation Studies
Creative Writing
English
Family and Child Development
Fashion
French
Geography
German
History
International Studies
Linguistics
Mathematics
Military History
Military Leadership – Air Force*
Military Leadership – Army**
Philosophy
Physics
Professional Writing
Spanish
Teaching English as a Second Language
Back to List ^
Behavioral Sciences
Psychology
Sociology
Back to List ^
Business
Accounting
Business
Coaching
Computer Science
Hospitality Management
Information Security
Information Systems
Sport Management
Sport Outreach
Back to List ^
Communication and the Arts
Communication and Digital Content Minors
Communication
Digital Media – Audio
Digital Media – Editing
Digital Media – Performance
Digital Media – Video
Digital Media – Writing for Digital Media
Digital Journalism
Visual and Performing Arts Minors
Cinematic Arts
Cinematic Arts Production
Dance
Graphic Design
Photography
Studio Art
Theatre Arts
Back to List ^
Divinity
Apologetics and Cultural Engagement
Biblical Greek
Biblical Languages
Biblical Literature
Biblical Studies
Camp and Outdoor Adventure Leadership
Christian Leadership
Church Planting
Disability Ministry
Expositional Preaching
Global Studies
Pastoral Leadership
Public Theology
Theology
Urban Ministry
Women’s Leadership
Youth Ministries
Back to List ^
Education
Special Education
Back to List ^
Engineering
Technology Entrepreneurship
Back to List ^
Government
Criminal Justice
Government
International Relations
Politics and Policy
Pre-Law
Strategic and Intelligence Studies
Back to List ^
Health Sciences
Biology
Biomedical Sciences
Chemistry
Health Promotion
Physical Education and Health
Public Health
Strength and Conditioning
Back to List ^
Music
Performance: Brass, Woodwind, or Percussion
Performance: Voice, Keyboard, Guitar, or Strings
Back to List ^"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/academics/career-center/","Our purpose is preparing you to live out yours.
You want to make an impact — and your future career will help you do it.
But getting from graduation to employment in your field often takes more than just a great education.
It takes networking. And experience. 
At Liberty’s Career Services, we’re committed to partnering with you to give you all the tools, resources, and experience you’ll need to land the job you want — so you can make the impact you’ve dreamed of.
Our graduates have gained employment with…
American Psychological Association
American Psychological Association
Concerned Women for America
The Family Research Council (FRC)
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
The Fresh Air Fund, a nonprofit organization
Hendrick Automotive Group
Hewlett-Packard Company (HP)
National Football League (NFL)
Textron Systems, an unmanned aircraft system (drone) company
Networking
Your network is your people. They orbit the career circles you want to be in and share relevant ideas, information, and contacts with you.
Networking involves adding people to your own personal network and interacting with them to make and keep connections. Volunteer, attend career fairs, and plug in to networking websites to start making these connections.
Handshake is an online tool used by over 400,000 employers to showcase internship and job opportunities. Liberty launched this tool in October 2018, and over 44,800 LU students and alumni are already connecting with more than 10,100 approved employers through it.
Liberty University Fellowships
Our Washington Fellowship is made up of Christ-centered, semester-long internship programs hosted by Liberty University, which offer students of all majors the unique opportunity to live and work in our nation’s capital.
The Washington Fellowship
Work in the energetic atmosphere of our nation’s capital through the Washington Fellowship. Experience historical downtown housing, professional development, and networking events while gaining career experience.
This program has placed students in organizations such as the National Park Service, American Psychological Association, Metro Police Department, and U.S. Congress.
Student making connections at one of Liberty’s career fairs
Career Fairs
Career fairs bring big companies directly to you — organizations like the FBI, Chick-fil-A, Fox News, Hendrick Motorsports, and the U.S. Secret Service. Eight industry-specific career fairs are held every year.
For a complete list of upcoming career fairs, visit our office in Montview Student Union or online at Liberty.edu/CareerEvents.
“As a growing, but still relatively small business, it’s important to feel confident in both the aptitude and character of the people we bring in. The Liberty graduates we have hired thus far have exceeded expectations.”
– Matt Pantana, CEO of Clearview Software
Career Prep
At Liberty, our goal is to see you step into a successful career. You’ll have access to tons of resources to help you succeed in your career search from finding the right major to preparing for the job search and interview process. Reach out to a career coach – they’re available to guide you through each step of the process.
Take a look at some of the ways you’ll be prepared for your future:
Résumé Critique
The Career Center has an online résumé and cover letter critique service to provide you with feedback. For additional customization tips for specific career fields and employers, schedule an appointment to speak to a career coach.
Interview Tips
Be prepared for your interview with strategy ideas and tips on impressing your potential employer. Learn how to create your “elevator pitch” to present yourself with confidence, as well as additional steps to take after the interview to ensure you are remembered after you leave the building.
“I think people locally will be really amazed with the talent they see come out of Liberty and how its rising entrepreneurs can be a strong source of job creation over time.”
– Matt Schubert, Liberty University alumnus and CEO of Selective Wealth Management
Questions?
Contact us at the Career Center if you’ve got any questions, or you’d like to set a time to meet with us. We’re here to partner with you as you excel in your future career!
Hours and Location
Mon.-Fri. | 8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Montview Student Union | Room 2560"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/the-liberty-story/","How Far We’ve Come
“Liberty University develops Christ-centered men and women with the values, knowledge, and skills essential for impacting the world for Christ.”
— Liberty University mission statement
50th Anniversary
For 50 years, Liberty University has continued the legacy and mission of Dr. Jerry Falwell by creating a diverse, faithful, and global community of Champions for Christ. By faith, he envisioned a campus that would train the world-changers, movement-makers, and godly servants of tomorrow. He saw a campus where students could experience the life-changing love of God and be equipped to go forth from campus to share that love with the world. By the grace and provision of God, his vision became reality. We persevere in an ever-changing world, rooted in our unchanging God and steadfast in our mission during this year of celebration and every year to come.
It started with a mountain and a dream.
In 1971, the Rev. Jerry Falwell dreamed that the world could be filled with doctors, lawyers, pilots, engineers, nurses, teachers, artists, and professionals from every walk of life who loved God and were the very best at what they’d been called to be.
When he stood on the mountain where he had hunted and hiked as a child and said a university like no other would one day cover that mountain and train students to become those professionals, some people laughed.
But some people dreamed, and then they prayed.
Fall came, and with it 154 students taught by four full-time faculty. They slept on metal cots in dilapidated hotels, they went to class in middle schools, church rooms, parking lots — anywhere they could take their books and Bibles and learn. They lived on an island in the James River and climbed out of the bus every time it crossed the rickety, wood-slatted bridge because the combined weight of the students and the bus would surely send them all plunging into the river.
3,000-seat tent used to hold the rapidly growing student body for Chapel in 1978
Aerial shot of campus in 2021 – including the Vines Center, where Convocation is now held each week
Liberty University is not just another school.
It is the realization of a dream, the product of thousands of prayers. It was built to invite students into a bigger, better story.
Come join the story, and see what God can do with your dreams on this mountain.
Apply NowRequest Info"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/who-we-are/","Our Identity Is in Our People
It’s been said that your people are your brand.
Since 1971, the Liberty University community has been made up of people who embody the mission of Training Champions for Christ.
In the ‘70s, when the single building used for classes was scheduled for demolition, faculty, staff, and students came together to pray. They stood out in the snow for two hours asking God to give them a campus they could call home.
In the ‘80s, when finances were so tight payroll couldn’t be met, faculty and staff continued to work — without paychecks — because investing in their students was more important to them than being comfortable.
Tough. Committed. Sold out to training and becoming top-notch professionals who represent excellence, integrity, and the hope of Christ wherever they go.
These — and thousands like them — are the brand of Liberty University. They believe that “If it’s Christian, it ought to be better,” and are willing to do what it takes to build something bigger than themselves.
Transformed lives, like the transformed campus born out of prayers in the snow, are the hallmark of the Liberty experience.
Get to know some of these Champions for Christ, and imagine how God could transform your life here at Liberty.
Ready to join the Liberty family?
Apply NowRequest Info
Faculty
Our accomplished faculty could teach anywhere, but they choose Liberty — not because of the world-class facilities or cutting-edge tools they’re given to teach with, but because they know an education that excludes God is incomplete.
And if you ask any one of them, they’ll tell you that teaching at Liberty is not their job — it’s their ministry. 
Professor Cindy Drohn, School of Nursing
Dr. Roger Mackey, Eagle Scholars
“Liberty has been a haven for me. I can be who I am in terms of a Christian. I’m with likeminded individuals who have the same appreciation for how we understand science and how God has done things, rather than using science as a replacement for God.
We truly believe that we’re serving God by serving these students, so it gives us extra motivation to perform our jobs well. We’re supporting the growth of our students who will go out and make a tremendous difference in the community as physicians.”
— Dr. Joseph Gigliotti, Liberty University College of Osteopathic Medicine Assistant Professor of Physiology 
Students
Innovators. Dreamers. Leaders. Liberty students believe their individual voices can make a difference — and they don’t wait until after graduation to speak up.
They may be athletes, artists, or activists — but when they’re here, they’re one amazing family.
Andrea Y.
Sarah B.
Derek & Esther
International Students
With students from all 50 states and over 70 nations around the world, Liberty is a crossroads for individuals with differing points of view and life experiences.
Here you’ll meet peers whose backgrounds, interests, and ideas align with and diverge from your own.
We learn from one another.
And we serve one another as we serve God.
Meet one of Liberty’s international students.
Alumni
Going to a Christian school doesn’t mean that life after college will automatically be easy. For many students, time at Liberty teaches them grit, grace, and unwavering trust in the Lord — no matter what challenges or successes find them afterward. The waves these alumni are making continue to ripple far beyond Lynchburg, Va. 
Brandon Fleming
Samantha Ponder
Rashad Jennings
Jeri Porter
Brandon Apon
Alumni Mash-up
Hooked? Learn more about members of the Liberty community and the latest university news by reading current and archived issues of the Liberty Journal."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/virtual-experiences-at-lu/","Virtual Experiences at LU
Discover Liberty University from the comfort of your home by visiting virtually. Explore campus, meet with an admissions counselor, and connect with us from a safe distance.
Virtual Tour
Explore our world-class academic, athletic, and recreational facilities with a 360-degree view! Our tour guides will share what makes our 7,000-acre campus unique, as well as fun facts about the history and future of the university.
Virtual Tour 
Live Video Appointments with a Residential Admissions Counselor
Schedule a 30-minute individual online appointment with one of our student tour guides and admissions counselors to go on a virtual tour and learn about your next steps in the enrollment process. Appointments are available Tuesday-Thursday. Please schedule at least one business day in advance.
*Thursday dates that coincide with CFAW have no availability. 
Schedule an Appointment
Facility Tours
Learn about campus landmarks and amenities from the people who use them every day – our students!
Take a Look
Graduate Virtual Appointments with an Admissions Counselor
Schedule a 30-minute online appointment with one of our student tour guides and graduate admissions counselors to go on a virtual tour and learn about your next steps in the enrollment process. Appointments are available Tuesday-Thursday. Please schedule at least one business day in advance. 
*Thursday dates that coincide with CFAW have no availability. 
Schedule an Appointment
Self-Guided Exploration
Get a behind-the-scenes look at our newly renovated campus with 360-degree views of classrooms, labs, athletic facilities, dorm rooms, and more.
Explore Campus
Live Chat
Contact an admissions counselor via live chat to get your questions answered immediately! Chat hours are Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday from 9 a.m.-8 p.m.; Wednesday from 9 a.m.-6 p.m.; and Saturday from 10 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat Now
Connect on Social Media
Get a behind-the-scenes look at what’s happening on campus and in the lives of our students by following us on social media.
Instagram Facebook"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/what-we-believe/","Our Mission
Liberty University develops Christ-centered men and women with the values, knowledge, and skills essential to impact the world. Here we Train Champions for Christ.
The mission of Liberty University isn’t just to help you get a degree — it’s to train up leaders who use their God-given gifts and abilities to transform the world for good.
As you’re deciding whether to attend Liberty, you may have several questions, such as “What is Liberty University’s statement of faith?” or “What is Liberty’s mission statement?” Here we answer these questions and more. Find out what sets us apart — and how our commitment to the Gospel shapes our approach to education.
Apply today and prepare to make a difference in your workplace, your community, and the world.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find a welcoming environment that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to our values helped us rank as Niche.com’s #2 most conservative college in America.
Since 1971, excellence, mentorship, commitment to a biblical worldview, service-mindedness, and responsible stewardship have defined who we are. And that’s how it’s going to stay.
Excellence is part of our DNA. From the beginning, we’ve been saying, “If it’s Christian, it ought to be better.” From academics to athletics to the way we train students to be champions in every area of life, excellence is more than a buzzword — it’s our standard.
Mentorship means that our students are not statistics — they’re family. And earning a Liberty degree means not only getting an academically rigorous education, but also sitting under experienced professionals who care about their students and who personally mentor them. Liberty students learn to lead under leaders who build them up and send them out, equipping them to live life after graduation with wisdom and grace.
Our commitment to a biblical worldview is not lip service but the foundation of our identity as a Christian university. And though we are evangelical in both tradition and method, we celebrate the commonalities shared by all Christians — they are what unify us and equip us to celebrate our diversity as individuals.
Being service-minded means making others a priority. Whether it’s serving one another within our community — our classmates, coworkers, and peers — or working to effect social change outside our community, we believe coming alongside those in the midst of difficulty and standing up for them is a privilege and an important way we demonstrate being Champions for Christ.
Responsible stewardship has always been a hallmark of Liberty’s character. We hold ourselves accountable to decisions that affect our students and our community — from developing innovative scholarship solutions to promoting sustainability and environmental responsibility. We resolve to give our best and do our best with whatever God graciously provides us.
Liberty University’s Philosophy of Education
Liberty University’s Statement of Mission and Purpose
Liberty University’s Doctrinal Statement
Are you ready to become a Champion for Christ?
Apply NowRequest Info
Frequently Asked Questions
What is Liberty University’s motto?
What is Liberty University’s vision?
What does Liberty University believe?
What denomination is Liberty University affiliated with?"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/convocation/","World-changers and Difference-makers
The most effective culture-makers can comfortably examine an issue from many perspectives.
And they understand that changing culture means actively engaging with it.
At Liberty, we invite leaders of distinction — in business, entertainment, government, ministry, sports, the arts, and more — to share their perspectives from the Convocation stage. Every week, you’ll be compelled to think clearly and with conviction about big ideas and important cultural issues.
No matter which discipline you choose, Convocation empowers you to see into professional spheres outside your own, so you can graduate well-rounded and prepared to surpass the expectations of your future employers. 
Convocation is the largest weekly gathering of Christian young people in the world — join us.
Apply NowRequest Info
Convocation Schedule"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/housing/","Relationships. Community.
Your dorm isn’t just where you live — it’s where life happens together.
Lots of laughing, deep conversations, and unforgettable memories — no matter where you live on campus, these kinds of connections come standard.
The friendships you’ll make on your residence hall and with members of your brother or sister dorm will not only enrich your time in college, but will also impact your life for years to come.
But that’s not all — our commitment to world-class education means that Liberty University’s dorms are designed to give you what you need to succeed in your education.
With access to our campus’s best resources, you will become part of Liberty University’s mission to Train Champions for Christ.
Students hanging out in our traditional-style residential dorms at Liberty University.
Make Liberty your college “home away from home”
Apply NowRequest Info
Want to see what living on campus will be like before you commit to a residence hall? 
Take a virtual tour, or schedule a tour of campus, and you can see for yourself!
High-Rise
Residential Commons 1, 2, and 3
These residence halls offer 2-person rooms with attached bathrooms and spacious common areas.
Apartment-Style
Campus East and the Quads
These living areas are made up of suites containing multiple bedrooms and bathrooms, with a shared kitchen and living room.
Traditional
The Hill, the Circle, and the South Tower
These traditional university dorm rooms create vibrant community with 3-person rooms and community bathrooms on each floor. Experience Liberty University’s residence life in the heart of campus.
Other Liberty Housing
The Residential Annex
These hybrid housing dorms allow students to separate school and living while benefiting from similar amenities to students living on campus. Each room houses 2 students and has a private bathroom. While the Annex is not available to new students, it is an option you can consider in future semesters. 
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
What Every Hall Has in Common
Healthy interpersonal relationships and community are vital to our success as people. Liberty University’s vision is to create an environment for you that will help you have success in every aspect of your education with a solid Christian foundation. As Christians, we take the responsibility to love, support, and encourage one another through our life journeys seriously.
So within every living space at Liberty, you’ll find a 5 to 1 ratio of students to peer leaders who are committed to the personal wellness and spiritual development of those they serve.
A Resident Director and 2 Resident Assistants oversee each residence hall on campus, ensuring student safety and investing in students’ interpersonal relationships, personal wellness, and a global perspective.
Resident Shepherds (typically 2 per hall) nurture students’ spiritual development and intentionally create a sense of home
Community Group Leaders (several on each hall) facilitate weekly small groups where they foster a community of Christ-centered discipleship among the students in their group. Community is an integral part of Liberty.
Campus East girls’ community group
What Are Liberty’s Dorms Like?
Not sure what to expect from dorm life? Liberty University’s housing options have many features to meet your needs. Here are some common questions about Liberty’s housing:
Apartment-Style vs. Dorm-Style Housing
Are there kitchens in the dorms?
Do the dorms have bathrooms in suite?
What do college dorms look like at Liberty?
What’s Important to You?
When you consider living on a college campus, how do you envision it? Are there certain “must-haves” you’re looking for, like a stove, big closet, or private bathroom? Or are you more concerned with being close to classes and dining?
Universities with the best dorms make sure to offer many options to fit your priorities. Our variety of housing styles means you can choose the living environment that works best for you.
On-Campus Locations
Amenities
Price
Living Off Campus
Want to be in the center of it all? The Residential Commons and the Hill dorms stand at either end of the Academic Lawn, with easy access to:
The Montview Student Union
The Jerry Falwell Library
The Reber-Thomas Dining Hall
The majority of academic buildings
Outside of Slim Chickens on Campus East
Need to access the Athletics Corridor? Campus East housing stretches from just across Williams Stadium on one end to the field hockey and lacrosse fields on the other. You’ll also be close to:
David’s Place Clubhouse
The swimming pool
A tunnel to the Vines Center
Slim Chickens
The Liberty Bookstore
South Campus Residence Halls
Want a neighborhood feel while still being close to it all? The Quads and the Circle dorms offer:
A short walk to the Vines Center
Easy access to the entire campus through the bus line
Closer proximity to parking
Prefer the peace and quiet? Living a little further out in the South Tower gives you breathing space — while keeping you closely connected to everything on campus through the bus line. 
Check out our campus map to see exactly where our dorms are located in relation to one another."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/dining/","Create Some of Your Best College Memories While Sharing Meals Together
At Liberty, you can choose from a wide variety of eateries to suit your schedule, dining habits, and tastes.
With 20+ dining locations across campus and a nationally ranked dining hall that offers over 20 unique stations — including one dedicated to gluten- and allergen-friendly dishes — you’ll never get bored. And you’ll always have somewhere to make memories with your friends. From the Montview Student Union to the Reber-Thomas Dining Center (our dining hall), Liberty University’s campus dining options can help make your college experience even more special.
Sustainability
Liberty Dining Services uses Eco-Products, a company that provides 100% biodegradable flatware, plate ware, and cups. Products are also BPA free, compostable, and made from renewable energy sources, such as cane sugar.
Liberty Dining Services uses Eco-Products, a company that provides 100% biodegradable flatware, plate ware, and cups. Products are also BPA free, compostable, and made from renewable energy sources, such as cane sugar.
We use napkins that are made of 100% recycled paper, and our Xpressnap dispensers encourage customers to take (and waste) fewer napkins.
92% of the chemicals Liberty Dining uses are “Green Seal” certified, concentrated, or sustainable.
We seek to purchase products from local farms and dairies and participate in farm-to-school initiatives. Through our Better Tomorrow commitment through Sodexo at Liberty University, we track our local purchases to ensure 20% of our annual food purchases are local.
Our on-campus Argo Tea and Einstein Bros. Bagels locations both serve Caribou Coffee, which is Rainforest Alliance certified, small-batch crafted, and sourced from small farms.
We are proud to feature 100% Fair Trade- and USDA-certified Aspretto coffee, as well as 100% USDA-certified, organic, and ethically sourced Numi teas. Everything that touches our coffee is green, including our 10% post-consumer fiber cups and Fair Trade sugar.
Reber-Thomas Dining Center
The Reber-Thomas Dining Center* (Liberty’s dining hall) is a two-story, 120,000-square-foot all-you-care-to-eat buffet that boasts a seating capacity of more than 2,700. It provides breakfast, lunch, and dinner and offers over 20 unique stations to choose from, including:
Asian influenced cuisine like General Tso’s, sweet n’ sour pork, fried rice, and more
Rotating international cuisines like Greek, African, Hispanic, and French
A large salad bar and vegan station
Fresh, house-prepared sushi rolls
Fresh-made pasta tossed with customizable ingredients and sauce 
Customizable burritos/bowls and nachos
Gourmet-style and customizable burgers
Made-to-order omelets
Freshly baked goods like cookies, brownies, and muffins
Hot and iced coffee bar with a variety of creamer flavors and sugar
And much more!
Our commitment to dining excellence has been recognized by both College Magazine (CM) and Niche.com in recent months. CM recognized our program’s dedication to sustainability, healthy options, and variety by adding us to their Top 10 Colleges with the Best Dining Options list! We were also ranked #3 in Virginia and #19 in America for Best College Food by Niche.com for 2023.
Other Dining Options Across Campus
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Enter quote content here.
— Enter the name of the source,Enter the degree of the source
Special Dietary Needs
From our general manager to our front-line servers, all of our employees work diligently to address the dietary needs of Liberty students, especially those with food allergies, Celiac disease, or other special dietary requirements. Because of Liberty’s commitment to meeting all your needs, we have a Registered Dietitian on staff to assist with designing allergen-friendly dining options.
Our award-winning Allergen-Friendly station at the Reber-Thomas Dining Center offers meals prepared without 8 of the 9 of the most common food allergens: peanuts, milk, eggs, wheat, soybeans, shellfish, sesame, and tree nuts.
For those with gluten intolerance, we offer gluten-free pitas, pasta, buns, bread, pizza crust, and more at dining locations around campus. And our Gluten Intolerant Options (GIO) program allows students with a gluten dietary restriction to swipe for gluten-free items at no additional charge (gluten-free options are available to students not enrolled in the GIO program for a small fee). To apply for the Gluten Intolerance Option (GIO) fill out this form.
Liberty University’s Meal Plans
Liberty’s meal plans are designed to maximize your college dining experience. We offer 2 residential meal plan options: Freedom Dining and Freedom Dining PLUS+.
Both of these plans provide unlimited access to Liberty University’s Reber-Thomas Dining Center. With either plan, you will also receive $200 per semester ($120 in Dining Dollars and $80 in Flames Cash). And both plans give you 10 meal swipes per week (to be used at locations other than the main dining hall)!
The Freedom Dining plan’s swipes can be used at select locations on campus, while the Freedom Dining PLUS+ plan allows swipes at any dining location for select menu items.
Frequently Asked Questions
What are Liberty University’s restaurant options?
Does Liberty University have commuter meal plans?
How do you use meal swipes at Liberty University?
What are PLUS+ swipes at Liberty University?
What’s the difference between Liberty University’s Dining Dollars and Flames Cash?"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-and-wellness/","When you feel your best, you’re able to perform at your best.
Your physical, mental, and spiritual health influences your success — both in and out of the classroom.
And because anytime is a great time to develop lifelong habits, Liberty University is committed to creating a health-conscious culture, not only for you, but also for faculty, staff, and members of the surrounding community.
Whether through physical exercise, nutrition, medical care, or counseling, at Liberty, you’ll find ways to be — and feel — your best.
Did You Know?
Liberty is one of 52 campus partners from 30 states joining together with the Partnership for a Healthier America (PHA) Healthy Campus Initiative, a national program that supports health and wellness on college campuses.
Over 100 classes per week are offered in Zumba, Pilates, CrossFit, cycling, aerobics, and more throughout the school year.
The Liberty Mountain Trail Series hosts six races per year, from 5Ks to full marathons.
A registered dietitian is available to all students for personal nutrition assessments and counseling.
Liberty is one of 52 campus partners from 30 states joining together with the Partnership for a Healthier America (PHA) Healthy Campus Initiative, a national program that supports health and wellness on college campuses.
Liberty dining offers a minimum of 5 fruits, 5 vegetables, and 2 whole grains every lunch and dinner.
The LaHaye Recreation & Fitness Center recorded more than 30,000 visits per week over a seven-week span last spring.
The fitness center hosts close to 32,000 participants in group exercise classes per year — an average of more than two classes per student.
The Live Healthy Liberty Campus Coalition brings together representatives from departments across campus who meet quarterly to develop programs that support and facilitate healthy behaviors.
Users logged a total of 310,543 miles on LifeFitness Cardio stations last year.
The first film released nationally by Liberty’s Cinematic Arts department was about ultra-marathon legend and Liberty professor Dr. David Horton — it was called Extraordinary.
Plant-based food options are available at every dining station serving meat.
Exercise
Liberty students have free access to the LaHaye Recreation and Fitness Center through their Flames Pass. The facility offers these, as well as other great amenities:
Strength studio
Dance studio for Zumba, hip hop, and barre classes
Mind/body studio
Cycle studio
Aerobic studio
TRX training studio
Weight room
Cardio loft
Indoor track
Indoor basketball, racquetball, and volleyball courts
Indoor soccer center
For a small additional fee, personal trainers and select group classes can be booked.
Prefer to exercise outdoors? Liberty Mountain has over 50 miles of single- and double-track trails for hiking, running, and biking. Our Liberty Mountain Trail series offers six races per year — from 5Ks to full marathons — and bikes can be rented through the Hydaway Recreation Center.
If you’d rather get fit playing a group sport, up to 20 intramural sports are available to students, from beach volleyball, flag football, softball, and Ultimate to basketball, racquetball, table tennis, and dodgeball.
Liberty Outdoor Recreation Trail Series
Nutrition
A focus on healthy eating extends across all dining areas on campus. Fresh ingredients, good-for-you snacks, and natural food choices are a priority, so you’ll find them throughout our 24 diverse dining options.
Have a gluten intolerance? Gluten-free pitas, pasta, buns, bread, pizza crust, and other gluten-free options are available in nearly every location.
Want to eat like you’re in training? Our Training Table dining area exclusively creates high-protein meals tailored for athletes — but you don’t have to be an athlete to enjoy them. These high-performance meals are available to everyone.
Nutritious meal provided by Simple Servings in the Food Court at Reber-Thomas
Liberty chef at Simple Servings station helps students
Worried about a food allergy? Our award-winning Simple Servings station at the Food Court at Reber-Thomas offers meals prepared without gluten or seven of the most common food allergens:
Peanut
Milk
Eggs
Wheat
Soybean
Shellfish
Tree nuts
On-Campus Student Health Center
Concerned about what will happen if you get sick at school? Don’t be.
Liberty’s on-campus medical health center is serviced by two doctors, three physician assistants, and nurses from Central Virginia Family Physicians (CVFP).* You can even have your prescriptions delivered to your dorm room.
*CVFP is a nationally recognized medical group that provides quality health services, promotion, and preventive care.
Counseling
With issues like stress, anxiety, depression, and self-harm on the rise, easy access to mental health services is one important way Liberty cultivates a supportive culture for its students.
All actively enrolled residential, commuter, and local online students are eligible to receive counseling services through professional counselors. These include:
Emotional wellness workshops
Problem-focused sessions
Celebrate Recovery
Substance abuse counseling
Psychoeducational seminars
Group counseling
Individual counseling
Couples or family counseling
Mental health crisis services (on-call)
Extended counseling with a community provider
Psychiatric evaluations with a community provider
Learn more about our counseling services."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/safety/","Our focus is on protecting you — so your focus can be on your future.
Learn more about Liberty’s COVID-19 response and our strategies for maintaining students’ health and safety throughout the pandemic. 
When looking for the right college, campus safety is consistently near the top of parent and student concerns.
At Liberty University, your safety and well-being is one of our highest priorities.
Liberty University is regularly recognized as one of the safest campuses in the state — and in the nation.
As an LU student, you can be confident that your university has invested in activities and initiatives designed exclusively to keep you safe.
Liberty was ranked in the top 5% of safest college campuses in America for 2020 by Niche.com
Liberty University Police Department (LUPD)
Protecting you is our highest priority
LUPD is a full-service law enforcement agency staffed by highly trained professionals who provide 24/7 active police support.
All personnel are trained in Basic First Aid, CPR, and AED services. On-campus staff includes:
Over 40 Virginia State-certified, -sworn, and -commissioned officers
22 Virginia State-certified armed security officers
Several civilian employees
LUPD Officer and LUPD emergency vehicles
At times, LUPD will work with the Lynchburg Police Department, other law enforcement agencies, and first responders to ensure your safety. The department also coordinates with Student Counseling Services, Community Life, Residence Life, the Office of Equity and Compliance, and Title IX.
LU SAFE RIDE: Students can request a police escort across campus at any time by calling the LUPD Non-Emergency Number.
LUPD contact information: Emergency (434) 592-3911 | Non-Emergency: (434) 592-7641
Campus Safety Measures
Everyday steps to keep you safe
Pedestrian safety measures (bollards) are installed on major walkways.
A lighted pedestrian walking tunnel and bridge connect East Campus to the main campus.
Every residence hall and dormitory is badge-access only.
Student Leadership enforces a nightly curfew.
Safety Training
Helping you be ready for anything
CAMPUS SAFETY: All new students must take a campus safety seminar during their first semester (this is a graduation requirement).
FACULTY AND STAFF TRAINING: Our staff and faculty are encouraged to attend our Active Assailant Community Preparedness Class (AACP). This course was developed based on data disseminated by the Department of Homeland Security. 
Emergency Management
Keeping you informed and prepared
Though we hope to never have to use them, Liberty University has comprehensive emergency plans in place to deal with any crisis that may occur on campus.
If severe weather or other emergency situations pose a threat, Liberty will communicate with students, faculty, and staff through our emergency notification system via text and/or email.
Behavioral Threat Assessment
We CARE 
The Office of Community Life is dedicated to coming alongside any student undergoing a crisis moment — while ensuring our entire university community remains safe and secure.
The CARE (Collaborate, Assess, Resource, Empower) Team exists to promote the safety and well-being of the university community by monitoring concerning behaviors over time and identifying patterns, trends, and disturbances in individual behavior. 
Conceal Carry at Liberty
Students, faculty/staff, and visitors are permitted to conceal carry while on campus. Individuals who conceal carry at Liberty must have valid state permit available at all times and be able to present it upon request.
General Firearms Safety Course
LUPD provides Liberty faculty, staff, students and family the opportunity to practice safe firearm handling through our General Firearms Safety Course.
This course includes a 90-minute instructional course, followed by a 30-minute practical range exercise."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/office-of-equity-and-inclusion/","Inclusion is just making people feel welcome.
As Christians, we believe that what we have in common — our identity in Christ — frees us to celebrate what makes us different.
With students from all 50 states and over 70 nations around the world, Liberty is a crossroads for individuals with differing points of view and life experiences.
Here you’ll meet peers whose backgrounds, interests, and ideas align with and diverge from your own.
We learn from one another.
And we serve one another as we serve God.
When you’re a Liberty student, you’ll join a community that fosters what transcends culture — peace, joy, hope, and love — and you’ll leave here prepared to think critically, independently, and globally.
Because at Liberty, you’re always welcome.
Meet some of Liberty’s international students.
Office of Equity and Inclusion
Students worshipping during Global Focus Week
Liberty is an academic and professional community committed to standing against all forms of unbiblical discrimination.
Our Office of Equity and Inclusion provides training, support, and community-building opportunities for leadership, faculty, staff, and students campus-wide through:
Diversity mentorship/retention
Group discussions
Educational training
Professional development
One-on-one/group coaching
Accreditation support
Discrimination advocacy
The LEAD Fellowship
The Leadership Excellence and Academic Development (LEAD) Fellowship celebrates undergraduate minority and international students by cultivating community and focusing on:
Multicultural Resource Room
Our ever-expanding range of 50+ equity and inclusion resources, which include award-winning documentaries, thought-provoking scholarly journals, multicultural books and a wide variety of cultural magazines, is available to anyone interested in broadening their understanding of diversity. Feel free to watch or listen to video or audio files while you’re there on the designated DVD and MP3 players as well.
Global Focus Week
Global Focus Week (GFW) is a semi-annual event aimed at raising global awareness among Liberty University students, faculty, and staff. Throughout GFW, students have the opportunity to hear from globally influential Convocation guests, connect with global workers, experience a variety of cultures, and participate in interactive events.
C. Daniel Kim International Student Center (ISC)
The ISC is a home away from home for the brave students who leave their countries to study in the United States — a place for the international student community at Liberty to gather, get help from advisors, and relax.
We also support our international students by helping them navigate federal regulations and promote a variety of cultures through on-campus workshops and cultural events.
Students relaxing and studying in the ISC"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/student-care-and-counseling/","Mental health is an important issue.
One that should be taken seriously.
As Christians, we consider it a privilege to bear one another’s burdens — emotionally and spiritually.
At Liberty, providing ways for you to develop self-care habits or coping skills for anxiety, depression, or addiction is not optional. It’s essential. 
Because ensuring that you can easily access support services is just one of the ways we create a culture of caring.
You’ll have one dedicated peer leader* to every five students on your residence hall and professional counseling services available through the Dean of Students office. Whether you need a shoulder to cry on or a seasoned counselor, you’ll find people ready to listen to — and support — you.
*Peer leaders include Resident Assistants (RA), Resident Shepherds (RS), and Community Group Leaders (CGL).
“Going through counseling gave me renewed peace, joy, and hope in my life. I struggled with a lot of anxiety and fear after going through natural disasters while living in South Asia. With counseling, I was able to work though traumatic events and memories in a safe and healthy way. I found freedom from the panic attacks, anxiety, and nightmares that used to invade my life.”
– Student who received Liberty University’s Counseling Services
Did You Know?
Liberty’s psychology and counseling degree programs are among its largest.
Psychology and counseling faculty and students routinely travel to countries like Greece, Rwanda, Nepal, Costa Rica, and Spain as well as to cities like Baltimore and Las Vegas to teach on reconciliation and forgiveness and to provide and train others in trauma counseling for human trafficking and sex trafficking victims. 
Student Counseling Services (SCS)
If you find that you’re going through a tough time, having an immediate crisis,* or need help with an ongoing mental health concern, you can get support through Liberty’s SCS.
Services provided include:
Emotional wellness workshops
Problem-focused sessions
Substance abuse counseling
Psychoeducational seminars
Group counseling
Individual counseling
Couples or family counseling
Mental health crisis services (on-call)
Extended counseling with a community provider
Psychiatric evaluation with a community provider
*For emergency assistance after office hours, please contact your RD or call the LUPD emergency line at (434) 592-3911.
Counseling Appointments
Connect with the professional and/or the care plan that is most appropriate for you after completing an initial live screening appointment. You’ll fill out an assessment document and a consent form and set an upcoming appointment. We have walk-in appointments located at Green Hall 1830.
Learn More About Individual Counseling
Mental Health Screening
Because mental health is a key part of your overall well-being, it’s good to find out if you should connect with a mental health professional. 
Take Your Screening
Emotional Wellness Workshops
These fast-paced, three-session seminars are intended to help you with a variety of mental health concerns. You can choose from:
Group Support
Want to connect with others who understand what you’re going through? These groups meet regularly to serve and support one another:
“Student Counseling Services creates an environment where you feel welcomed. I think there is already a stigma about counseling, and it was beneficial to me to know that it was normal; it made me feel safe.”
– Student who received Liberty University’s Counseling Services
Title IX
If you or someone you know have a concern about sexual harassment, sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, or retaliation, our Speak Up campaign through the Title IX office can connect you with help right away.
CARE Team
Your voice can make the difference.
What you see matters. Be a difference-maker and help protect our university community by speaking up when you notice something out of the ordinary.
“My counselor is amazing, and I felt very comfortable meeting with her. She really understood my issues and helped me analyze how to fix them. She met me on my level and spoke my language. I can see a difference in myself in the last session from the very first session I attended. I am very happy and proud of what my counselor has helped me do.”
– Student who received Liberty University’s Counseling Services
Questions?
If you’ve got questions about our counseling services, or you’re interested in setting up an appointment, please reach out to us. We’re here to help!
Office Hours
Monday-Friday | 8 a.m.-4:30 p.m.
Closed Tuesdays for Staff Meeting | 1:45-3 p.m.
Closed Wednesdays for Convocation | 10:15-11:45 a.m.
Our schedule is modified during summer months and semester breaks."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/global-outreach/","There are many types of devastation in the world.
Natural. Personal. Communal.
And standing ready to help those who have been devastated is one way we demonstrate being Champions for Christ.
At Liberty, our urgent disaster relief team can teach you tangible ways to provide swift humanitarian, spiritual, and psychological aid — and then take you to disaster sites to do it in person.
No matter which degree program you choose, you and students like you can show up and make a life-changing difference to victims of floods, fires, tornadoes, and other disasters — including refugees in crisis.
No need to wait until you graduate. At Liberty, you can be part of a global solution now.
Liberty students provide aid to refugee families in Texas.
Go to college — change the world. Come and see the Liberty difference.
Apply NowRequest Info
Since 2015, faculty, staff, and students have traveled to provide:
Fire damage relief to California
Fire damage relief to California
Flooding relief in Nebraska
Relief from tornado damage in Alabama
Flooding relief to Tulsa, Oklahoma 
Hurricane Irma relief to Antigua
Earthquake relief to Mexico
Hurricane Joaquin relief to South Carolina
Syrian refugee ministry in Greece
Water crisis help to Flint, Michigan
Flood relief to Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Hurricane Matthew relief to North and South Carolina
Hurricane Harvey relief to Texas
Tornado relief to Mississippi
Flood relief to West Virginia
Hurricane Maria relief Puerto Rico (multiple trips)
Outreach projects to Skid Row and other low-income areas in Los Angeles, Calif.
Hurricane Michael relief to Florida
Wildfire relief to California (multiple trips)
Hurricane Florence relief to North Carolina
LU Serve Now
LU Send Nebraska
Liberty students assist in the aftermath of severe flooding in Nebraska. 
LU Serve Now mobilizes and trains students to meet immediate relief needs around the world.
As the humanitarian relief arm of the university, LU Serve Now is committed to serving the physical and spiritual needs of those who have experienced an unexpected disaster.
LU Serve Now mobilizes students quickly and empowers them as relief workers when catastrophes arise. Trip costs are covered by the university.
LU Serve Now: 
Has formed relationships with established aid organizations.
Is equipped and organized so that relief teams can leave within a few days to a week of a crisis.
Focuses on service-only trips.
Trains participating students in appropriate relief strategies.
LU Send Carolinas
LU Send Mississippi
“It’s important that we run to people who are hurting and broken, especially in crises that could happen at any moment.
It could be us tomorrow, and as human beings, we should be there for one another … the role of the Church in a crisis situation or natural disaster is to go and love and help people, to share hope in a hopeless situation, and to come together as community and family to help people in times of need.”
— Holly Griswold, associate director of LU Serve Now
How Can Your Degree Make a Difference in the Real World?
Liberty students are using their skill sets to make an impact across the globe
As Christians, we understand the importance of using every profession to build God’s Kingdom. That’s why courses are taught from a biblical worldview, professors see themselves as mentors, and learning opportunities span the globe.
Psychology, social work, and counseling faculty and students regularly travel to Greece, Spain, Rwanda, Nepal, India, China, Moldova, Portugal, Ecuador, and other areas to provide and train others in trauma care and counseling for human-trafficking and sex-trafficking victims.*
The trauma training that graduate counseling student Megan R. practiced in Greece not only prepared her to get a job in Las Vegas helping victims of sex abuse and trafficking — but also positioned her to provide emergency grief and trauma counseling to those affected by the 2017 Las Vegas shooting.
*Teams also participate in reconciliation and forgiveness facilitation and provide care and counseling in refugee camps.
“As a Junior during the summer of 2016, I had the opportunity to complete my internship abroad on a trip to Greece with the psychology department. We studied the impact of the human trafficking trade and learned about efforts being made to end the industry. 
“While on the trip, we studied in a classroom setting, as well as heard from those who have dedicated their lives to advocating for individuals trapped in human trafficking. We even had the opportunity to walk the brothel-riddled streets of Athens and pray for each person involved. 
— Hannah Marie Weiland, Mental Health Case Manager for Children, Horizon Behavioral Health"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/students/spiritual-growth/","Since 1971, Liberty University has had one mission — Training Champions for Christ.
It’s what drives everything we do.
And it’s how we work to build a better world.
When you’re on Liberty’s campus, you’ll find a group of people who are navigating life together, serving one another with grace, and striving to cultivate a culture that is Christ-like and community-focused.
As a Christ-centered community, we prioritize the spiritual health of our students.
Here, you’ll find resources and relationships to help you grow in your faith and a safe environment to solidify what you believe.
So you can go out and build a better world — as a Champion for Christ.
The Liberty Worship Collective is a team of student worship leaders who regularly invite the student body into times of praise during Convocation and Campus Community.
Liberty provides ample opportunities for you to grow spiritually through worship and discipleship.
Where will you find spiritual input at LU?
The classroom | All courses are taught from a biblical worldview by professors who are committed to their faith and to mentoring you.
Your dorm | Our 5:1 ratio of students to peer leaders on every hall means that you’ll be living everyday life with people who choose to build Gospel-centered community and live on mission with Jesus.
Your sports team | Coaches, assistant coaches, strength coaches — they understand the most important training you’ll receive is as a Champion for Christ, and their personal investment in you will show it.
Community service | Serving one another is not only something God asks us to do — it’s something that’s good for you. See how much joy you find in your life when you make a difference in someone else’s.
Convocation | Though our guest speakers come from a variety of personal and professional backgrounds, every Convocation begins with a time of worship.
Campus Community | Liberty’s weekly “church” service on Wednesday evenings is a time of refreshment, encouragement, and Bible-focused teaching. 
Your friends | While no community is perfect, the overall culture at Liberty is positive and encouraging, filled with people who want to inspire one another and be part of something greater than themselves.
Your phone | The Liberty Today mobile app offers you a wealth of useful information about what’s going on around campus — and it’s where you can request prayer from our team of 24/7 prayer warriors. Go to the “Campus Community” page of the LU Today app or text “PRAYERNOW” to 24502. You can post prayer requests and let others know you are praying for them.
Volunteer with Habitat for Humanity or one of many other community service organizations
Find multiple opportunities every week for corporate worship and praise
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find a welcoming environment that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to our values helped us rank as Niche.com’s #2 most conservative college in America. 
Worship through Campus Community
Campus Community is the central gathering place for worship and spiritual growth at Liberty. Draw closer to Christ every Wednesday night through this worship service centered around God’s Word.
Want to watch Campus Community for yourself?
Download the LU Today mobile app and go to the “Campus Community” page — previous services are available on-demand.
Follow the Liberty University Office of Spiritual Development on Facebook to watch Campus Community live.
Grow as a follower of Christ with mentorship from LU Shepherds
The LU Shepherd Office focuses on the spiritual needs of the student body, offering guidance, discipleship, and soul-care.
Eleven full-time LU Shepherds (five male and six female — one is dedicated exclusively to our student-athletes) provide pastoral care to the Liberty student body.
Each residence hall is staffed with two Resident Shepherds (RS), students who are directly mentored by the LU Shepherds and who pour into their peers in their dorms. Community Group Leaders (CGL) are directly mentored by the RS on their hall, and invest in a smaller group of students who meet weekly after Campus Community.
RS and CGL are trained in discipleship, spiritual formation, prayer, missions, and small group dynamics.
What do the Shepherds do?
Attend all Campus Community events and 
Meet together for prayer before.
Meet and pray with students after.
Make themselves available to talk or pray with students during altar calls.
Students are encouraged to draw closer to Christ through regular Bible study and prayer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/local-outreach/","Jesus Calls Us to Love Our Neighbors as Ourselves.
Though we might call it “being socially responsible” today, taking care of our community and the people who live there is one way we bring the words of Jesus to life.
Because the value of volunteering lies in more than just how it looks on a résumé. It lies in lending a hand. Restoring dignity.
It lies in reminding someone who’s been broken of the beauty that’s still within them.
At Liberty University, there are hundreds of ways for you to align your sense of social responsibility with your passions — so you will not only feel joy but spread it.
At Liberty, you are not only able to prepare for an exciting career – but you can also learn to give it meaning — living out the words of Jesus.
Students and faculty come together to serve the Lynchburg community.
Invest in your community as a college student
Apply NowRequest Info
LU Serve
LU Serve provides students with local, domestic, and international volunteer opportunities.
As the serving arm of the university, LU Serve develops partnerships with churches, ministries, and other service organizations and connects them to university departments and students. 
LU Serve provides experiences that: 
How can you make an impact?
Come to LU Serve Workshops
This regular series addresses topics and needs that are pertinent to serving in Lynchburg
Get Involved with Campus Serve
This weekly student-led event began in 2002
Today, over 150 students still regularly serve throughout Lynchburg
Pick your CSER (Christian Service)
LU Serve’s CSER (Christian/Community Service) program focuses on mentoring students in the Christian discipline of selfless service
“I had a friend who invited me to Campus Serve, and I completely fell in love with the kids and the community. You can’t help it. It’s hard to find a place where you can literally just share the Gospel at any moment. With Campus Serve, you can love people in ways that you can’t in most places.”
— Gabby M., ’18
#FlamesGiveBack
Throughout the year, student-athletes from Liberty’s 20 NCAA Division I programs serve the Lynchburg community and surrounding area under the #FlamesGiveBack initiative.
One special activity is the annual Hop on Pop Reading Day at Yellow Branch Elementary School in Rustburg, Va. Student-athletes, dressed in Dr. Seuss costumes, read to children, pass out popcorn, and play games. Over the past three years, student-athletes have collected more than 6,000 books to donate to the school."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/daily-campus-tours/","Join Us for a Campus Tour
You have to see the Liberty difference to believe it.
Experience it for yourself by taking one of our tours. Lasting only 3-4 hours, general campus tours are available every day of the week.* You’ll see model dorms, classrooms, and athletic and recreational facilities, as well as our award-winning dining hall.
Go through your Liberty checklist as you get a glimpse of what life may be like on our campus. Make a list of questions about the things that are important to you as you take this big step toward your future. Creating a learning environment where you will feel safe and supported is part of the Liberty experience. See for yourself how you will study, eat, and thrive on our beautiful campus that just gets better every year!
*TourLU is not offered on ExperienceLU, DecideLU, College For A Weekend event days, and home football game days.
Interested in learning more about a particular college or school within the university?
Let our team coordinate an academic appointment and/or class visit with your future academic program. Contact our team at least 5 business days prior to your visit so we can coordinate your appointment. 
Find out about our classrooms and facilities for your desired academic program as you take your Liberty University campus tour. We want you to make an informed decision and we are here to answer any questions you may have. Feel free to review our visitor guide contact list here for department specific contacts.
Apply for Free at TourLU
When you come for TourLU, you’ll explore our beautiful campus and learn about the Liberty University admission process. 
You’ll also have an opportunity to meet with an admissions counselor one-on-one and apply to Liberty for free. Students who apply also receive a free Liberty Flames t-shirt.
What does a typical TourLU look like?
TourLU is our version of a Liberty University open house. You can tour campus and experience what our dorms and classrooms look like. Plus, you will be able to see some of the athletic and recreational facilities that will be available to you as a Liberty student. Here are some of the highlights of our Liberty tours:
Our daily campus tour is student-led, so you will have the chance to talk to a Liberty student and see the university through their eyes.
The tour is part driving and part walking so we recommend comfortable, weather-appropriate clothing.
Some of the stops on our tour include academic buildings, recreation facilities, the dining hall, the Jerry Falwell Library, and more.
You’ll end your tour with a presentation and the option to do a one-on-one admissions session where you can apply for free.
Monday-Saturday | 9 a.m. and 2 p.m. (See below for details on Convocation and Football Saturdays)
Sunday | 2 p.m.
Group TourLU
Interested in bringing your group of ten or more to visit Liberty University? Hit the highlights of campus at a time that best fits your group’s schedule! 
Churches, Youth Groups, and School Groups are welcome!
Tours are offered during business hours only.
Schedule your tour by contacting the Visitors Center at (434) 582-2064 or email grouptours@liberty.edu
Convocation
Convocation is held every Wednesday and Friday at 10:30 during the academic year. If you’re planning a 9 a.m. tour, please come with your valid state-issued ID for entry. To watch previous Convocation events, start watching now! 
*Convocation will be offered via live-streaming service throughout the Fall 2020 semester to protect the health and safety of our student body and our guests. Want to get a taste of Convo ahead of time? Start watching now!
Football Saturdays
TourLU is not available on home football Saturdays, however, you can join us for an abbreviated walking tour that highlights campus from the top of our 17-story Freedom Tower. Our Freedom Tower tour will enable you to see the scenic beauty of the campus from a bird’s-eye view.
Tours depart from the Hancock Welcome Center at the top of each hour from 9 a.m. – 5 p.m.
Commencement TourLU Events
Commencement TourLU events are now available for registration! These 55-minute walking tours highlight the academic center of campus. Sign up for Commencement Campus Tours here.
o Commencement TourLU events will be available for registration in early spring 2022. These 55 minute walking highlight the academic center of campus. 
Questions?
Our Visitors Center team is here to assist you with any questions you have about your upcoming visit. Let us know how we can help you!
Hours 
Mon.- Fri. | 8 a.m.-6 p.m.
Sat. | 8:30 a.m.-6 p.m.
Sun. | 12 p.m.-6 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/experiencelu/","Experience All that Liberty Has to Offer
Find out what life is like at Liberty University – join us for ExperienceLU!
Engage with faculty and staff, sample food from different dining locations, learn about student services, take a look at sports and recreation centers, and explore the campus with our student team – all in one day.
Want help planning your visit? Our sample itinerary will give you a good idea of what to expect.
Apply for Free at ExperienceLU
The Basics
WHO: High school second-semester sophomores, juniors, seniors, transfer students, and their families
WHEN: Select Mondays and Fridays 
Sept. – 15, 29
Oct. – 6, 9, 20, 27, 30
Nov. – 3, 17
Dec. – 1
WHERE: Liberty University, Lynchburg, VA
WHY: Because your future is important, and you want to be as informed as possible before you make a big decision that affects it.
HOW: Register online or call an admissions counselor at (800) 543-5317
WHAT: Engage with faculty and staff, sample food from different dining locations while on your tour, learn about student services, take a look at sports and recreation centers, and explore the campus with our student team – all in one day. Guests in groups with visiting times before 9 a.m. can expect to have lunch between 11:30 a.m.–2 p.m., and guests in
groups after 9 a.m. can expect to have lunch between 1–3 p.m.
When you come to ExperienceLU, you’ll visit our school and colleges as well as learn about the Liberty University admissions process. You’ll have the opportunity to meet with an admissions counselor one-on-one and apply to Liberty for free. Students who apply at the event receive a free t-shirt.
Sample Itinerary
The schedule below outlines a typical ExperienceLU visit. It is arranged in no particular order and is subject to change. For a more detailed itinerary, select one of the dates above.
View Sample Itinerary
ExperienceLU – How does it work
During each ExperienceLU, guests will take an interactive tour of campus. Guests will arrive, park, and check into the event; then, there will be a welcome session before you start your tour. As a part of your experience, all prospective students and their families will have a personal admissions appointment following lunch. Once you complete your admissions appointment, you have two options available to you for the afternoon portion of the event. 
Academic Focuses: ​Once your ​admissions appointment is complete, our team will provide you a specific time that you will be able to go to the featured academic school/college. Faculty and staff will be ready and waiting to meet you and answer your questions. And if you’re thinking, “What if I don’t know what I am studying, or not interested in going to the academic focus?”, then no worries. You would want to check out the ExperienceLU Academic Open Houses.
Academic Open Houses: If you’re interested in a different area of study, you can visit the other schools and colleges for their open houses (see event itinerary for details when you arrive). Some colleges/schools will host a tour, while others invite a member of their faculty and staff to meet you and answer questions about their programs of study.
What if a group I want to be in is full? If a group is full on a particular date and you cannot come to another ExperienceLU event, you can sign up on the waitlist in the registration portal. You will be emailed if spots open up. 
Academic Focus Visiting Dates
Interested in attending a day we are highlighting a specific school? Each ExperienceLU, we will host academic open houses, but during our fall and spring semesters, we will feature 2 schools from among the rest to give prospective students a more in-depth look at that area’s facilities, programs of study, and more! Check below for more information on school-focused ExperienceLU visit dates. 
Aeronautics | Sept. 15, Nov. 17
Behavioral Sciences | Nov. 3
Business | Sept. 29, Oct. 30, Dec. 1
Communication and the Arts | Nov. 3
Divinity | Oct. 20, Nov. 17
Education | Oct. 6
Engineering | Sept. 15, Oct. 9
Government | Oct. 20
Health Sciences | Oct. 6, 27
Music | Oct. 9, 30
Nursing | Sept. 29, Oct. 27, Dec. 1
Special Accommodations
Any special accommodations (ie. food, accessibility) should be included in your event registration with the necessary details so that we can best prepare for your ExperienceLU Visit.
Questions?
Our admissions team is here to assist you with any questions you have about your upcoming visit. Let us know how we can help you!
Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/graduate-visits/","3 Ways to Visit Graduate School
Graduate TourLU
Get a quick 2-hour tour of campus in this high-level overview.
Graduate School Preview
Join this all-day event touring campus, connecting with current graduate students, and meeting one-on-one with faculty and staff. 
Graduate Virtual Visits
Don’t have time to come out for a visit? Visit virtually and learn about the enrollment process.
Graduate TourLU
Graduate School Campus Tour
What: A high-level overview of all that Liberty has to offer with a 2-hour tour of our campus. Your Graduate School Campus Tour includes campus highlights, such as our main Academic Commons, Jerry Falwell Library, and student community spaces. 
When: Monday-Friday | 9:30 a.m. to 11:30 a.m.
Please note: Graduate TourLU is not offered on other event days, such as CFAW, ExperienceLU, DecideLU, and Graduate School Preview
How: Contact the Visitors Center by calling (434) 582-2064 or emailing visitorscenter@liberty.edu to schedule your campus tour today! You can also register online.
Graduate School Preview
Preview Graduate School at Liberty University
What: This is a one-day, experiential event where you’ll discover, explore, and learn everything you want to know about life at Liberty University and our Graduate School programs. You will have the chance to see our campus, hear from academic leaders, and meet with your future professors as you get to know Liberty.
Who: College juniors, seniors, graduate transfer students, and their families.
When: Oct. 20, Nov. 3
How: Register online or over the phone with a graduate admissions counselor by calling (877) 298-9617. There is no cost to attend our Graduate School Preview.
Sample Itinerary
The schedule below outlines a typical Graduate School Preview visit. It is arranged in no particular order and is subject to change. For a more detailed itinerary, Select one of the dates above.
View Sample Itinerary
Graduate Virtual Visits
What: Schedule a 30-minute online appointment with one of our student tour guides and graduate admissions counselors to go on a virtual tour and learn about your next steps in the enrollment process.
When: Tuesday-Thursday* | Please schedule at least one day in advance
How: Make an appointment online.
*Thursday dates that coincide with ExperienceLU or CFAW have no availability. 
Have Any Questions?
Our admissions team is here to assist you with any questions you have about your upcoming visit. Let us know how we can help you!
Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/decidelu/","Experience Liberty University
Making the College Decision Easier
Are you ready to start your journey to becoming a college student? Have you already begun the college search? Whether you are a senior just starting out in the search process, or finishing your sophomore or junior year, we invite you to DecideLU!
The Basics
WHO? High school sophomores, juniors, seniors, transfer students, and their families.
WHAT? A one-day event designed to help you through your journey to become a Liberty University Student.
WHEN? Select Fridays during the summer:
Summer 2024 dates will be released in early 2024
WHERE? Liberty University, Lynchburg, Va.
COST? Each student is charged a $20 non-refundable registration fee. Students who attend DecideLU will receive a $10 Liberty University Barnes & Noble Voucher and a complimentary lunch as part of their visit.
WHY? At DecideLU, we offer the opportunity for you to start or complete the necessary process to enroll as a student. We recognize that many students may still have some final requirements to complete before starting college or are still making their final college decision.
When you attend DecideLU, you will have the option to build your own event schedule. We have specific sessions for high school sophomores and juniors as well as focused sessions for seniors looking to enroll in the fall. Each of these sessions are crafted to assist you in taking the next step with Liberty.
Individual meetings will also be held throughout the event with Admissions, Financial Aid, Student Accounts, and Military Affairs as well as our Transfer Evaluation team. Seniors will also have the opportunity to meet with a professional advisor to review their program of interest. Students attending DecideLU will be emailed a link to register for these meetings one week prior to their event date.
Sample DecideLU Event Itinerary
Dining at DecideLU
Guests will have the opportunity to enjoy a light breakfast of donuts and coffee in the morning as you check in to the event. Students who register for DecideLU are also provided a complimentary meal pass for lunch during their visit. Parents and family members are welcome to join their students for lunch, and pay at the door. The cost to eat for all parents and other guests will be handled the day of the event at the door (prospective students attending the event eat for free as part of their DecideLU registration). 
Liberty University is proud to offer several dining locations, many of which will be open during your DecideLU visit. Student meal cards will not be accepted at these locations, but you will be able to purchase meals at these locations if you so choose. Summer dining locations and their hours of operation for your DecideLU visit will be announced soon.
DecideLU Events & Sessions
Questions?
Our Resident Admissions team is here to assist you with any questions you have about your upcoming visit. Let us know how we can help you!
Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/travel-reimbursement/","Get Reimbursed for Traveling to an LU Event
Prospective Student Events
If you travel to a prospective student event (e.g. College For A Weekend (CFAW), ExperienceLU, or DecideLU) via train, rental car, plane, or bus and then enroll as a student, up to $750 of your fare will be applied as a credit to your Liberty University account once you begin your classes. Look for more visiting opportunities here.
Please Note: The only prospective student events that are eligible for travel reimbursement are College For A Weekend (CFAW), DecideLU, and ExperienceLU. This offer does not extend to other events or daily tours. Reimbursement is only applicable to the student’s fare and is only available to undergraduate students.
Travel Expenses Applicable to Reimbursement
Public or rented transportation to Liberty University. If you travel to a location other than Lynchburg, you may be reimbursed if you rent a car for travel to Lynchburg or utilize Transit Services to travel to Liberty. While personal transportation, such as a personal vehicle, may be used, it will not be reimbursed. 
Domestic and international travel.
One-time reimbursement. Students who attend more than one Prospective Student Event are not eligible for more than one reimbursement.
Travel Expenses Not Applicable to Reimbursement
Charges that will not be reimbursed include, but are not limited to:
Checked baggage fees
Flight change fees
Gas for a rental car or personal car
Hotel expenses
Meals
Seat upgrade fees
Tips, valet costs, concierge fees, etc.
Travel insurance, ticket insurance, or any other type of insurance (including renter’s insurance for car rentals)
Reimbursement Instructions
Reimbursements may only be requested after Add/Drop Week. Reimbursement requests must be received by the last day of classes of your first semester.
The following printed information must be brought to a Student Accounts representative in the Student Service Center (no electronic submissions will be approved):
Your registration receipt from the event you attended, or the registration confirmation email.
Don’t have either of these? Come see us anyway! We will take a look through our registration archives for a record of your attendance.
Your travel itinerary. This should have your name on it, with dates that correspond to the event for which you attended, as well as the price for your ticket with an itemized list of costs. It should also contain your departure and arrival destinations. If your itinerary does not show that your final destination was Lynchburg, VA., you must provide receipts showing that you rented a car to get to Lynchburg, Va.
Your Liberty ID Card/Flames Pass.
Questions?
Student Accounts Hours
Mon., Tue. & Th., Fri. | 8 a.m.-8 p.m.
Wed. | 8 a.m.-6 p.m.
Sat. | 10 a.m.-6 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/visit-guide/","Directions and Parking
We are excited to welcome you to our campus! Please use 1971 University Boulevard, Lynchburg, VA, 24515 when entering your address for your trip! We recommend that you complete your digital visitor parking pass the day of your visit by completing this form and reviewing important parking information.
Directions to Liberty University
Directions to the Hancock Welcome Center
Lodging
Lodging/Hotel Accommodations
Bed and Breakfasts in the Area
Current LUO Intensive Students
Disability Accommodations
Visitor Guide Booklet
Explore Lynchburg
Discover why so many Liberty University graduates decide to call Lynchburg home. Whether you explore the near by Blue Ridge Mountains, our thriving downtown community and riverfront or enjoy day trips throughout the region, Lynchburg provides great adventures that add to your collection of special memories of college.
Discover More here:
Explore Lynchburg by the seasons
Find out what is happening in Lynchburg
Learn why so many people who visit Lynchburg come back again and again
Shuttles
We offer complimentary pick-up and drop-off services to prospective students and their families when coming to tour our beautiful campus.* This service is available to and from the following locations in Lynchburg, Va.:
Lynchburg Regional Airport
Lynchburg Amtrak
Lynchburg Greyhound Station
This service to and from our campus comes at no charge to you. Please contact our team at visitorscenter@liberty.edu or (434) 582-2064 to arrange your transportation. Your request is best provided when received 48 hours before your arrival.
Current Liberty University Students seeking shuttle services may contact Liberty University Transit.
*Complimentary shuttle service is offered during daily hours of operation as shared below:
Mon.- Fri. | 8 a.m.-6 p.m.
Sat. | 8:30 a.m.-6 p.m.
Sun. | 12 p.m.-6 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/important-dates-and-deadlines/","Liberty University Residential Calendar
Liberty University has many important dates that occur each semester. To help you stay on top of your busy schedule we have provided an easy-to-follow list. Whether you are in a Spring or Fall session, you can find your “can’t miss” dates and deadlines here.
For quick access to dates and deadlines, check out the current and next semester dates and deadlines below.
You can also view the full Liberty University Academic Calendar from the Registrar’s Office for specific Liberty dates and deadlines. 

Important Dates and Deadlines
Fall 2023
January 3 – Financial Check In (FCI) Opens
April 12 – Registration opens for select New Students (must have paid the Enrollment Deposit before March 1 and have completed FCI and assessments before April 2)
April 19 – Registration opens for all other New Students and all New Graduate Students
July 17 – Book Vouchers and Flames Cash available at LU Bookstore
August 1 – New Student Book Dollars available at LU Bookstore
August 11 – FCI deadline for new students ($150 late fee applied on Aug. 12)
August 16 – Dorms and Dining open
August 21 – Classes begin
Spring 2024 
September 13 – Spring 2024 students, once accepted, can access their math and English assessments in Canvas
October 2 – Financial Check In (FCI) opens for all new students
November 1 – Registration opens for new undergraduate students (must have paid Enrollment Deposit before Oct. 1 and have completed FCI and assessments prior to Oct. 28)
November 8 – Registration opens for all other new undergraduate students and all new graduate students
December 3 – Book Vouchers available at Barnes & Noble
December 20 – New student Book Dollars available at Barnes & Noble
January 5 – FCI Deadline for new students at 11:59 PM ($150 late fee applied on Jan. 6)
January 11 – Residence halls open – new students (8:00 AM)
January 15 – Spring semester begins
January 19 – Last day to add or drop a class until 4:00 PM
March 1 – Book Vouchers/Book Dollars Expire
Have Questions About Your Schedule?
If you have any questions or need more information, please don’t hesitate to contact us!
Admissions Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/students/admissions/","Take Your First Step Toward Joining the Liberty Family
There are a lot of complicated processes in life — the college admission process shouldn’t be one of them. Neither should the financial aid process.
So, great news! Once you apply to Liberty, you’ll receive an individualized Student Checklist that will guide you through admission and walk you through every form, process, and step along the way.
Liberty University’s application process is designed to be as straightforward as possible. We’ve broken it down into 5 simple steps, outlined below. If you’re ready to become a Champion for Christ at Liberty University, apply today!
Want More Details?
If you have any questions or need more information, please don’t hesitate to call us at (800) 543-5317 or email admissions@liberty.edu.
Admissions Steps
1
Application
2
Acceptance
3
Financial Aid
4
Check-In
5
Register
Step 1 – Submit Your Admission Application
Who can apply to Liberty University?
High school second-semester sophomores, juniors, and seniors
Transfer students
How can I apply?
There are a few ways you can apply to Liberty:
Complete an online application
Contact us via Live Chat
Apply over the phone at (800) 543-5317
Stop by the admissions office on our beautiful 7,000-acre campus, recently rated #4 college campus in America by Niche.com.
What are the requirements to get into Liberty University?
Learn what it takes to join the Liberty family on our undergraduate admission requirements page.
Does Liberty University have an application fee?
Yes, we charge a $50 application fee (which is deferred until Financial Check-In).
There are many ways to take advantage of Liberty University’s application fee waiver. If you apply while you are on campus during a daily visit, ExperienceLU event, or Liberty’s College For A Weekend (CFAW), your fee will be waived.
Get Started on Your Admission Process
Apply NowRequest Info
Step 2 – Submit Your Admission Documents and Get Accepted
Claim your Liberty account.
Tell us who you are and what you can achieve at Liberty by writing and sending in your personal essay.
Submit your high school transcripts. 
High school students: We can make an admission decision based on your preliminary transcripts (grades 9-11). Request unofficial transcripts from your school and upload them to your Student Checklist or have your high school guidance office email them to AdmissionsDocs@liberty.edu. (Note: Unofficial transcripts can be used for acceptance purposes. Liberty will need your final official transcripts prior to you attending.)
Transfer students: We can make an admission decision based on your final high school transcripts. Upload them to your Student Checklist or have your high school guidance office email them to AdmissionsDocs@liberty.edu.
If you submit a Transcript Request Form along with your unofficial transcripts, we’ll be able to expedite your admission decision by requesting the official transcripts on your behalf.
Submit your SAT, ACT, or CLT scores (Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.) 
SAT (Liberty Code: 5385)
ACT (Liberty Code: 4364)
Submit your Enrollment Deposit (Note: the earlier you submit your deposit, the more scholarships you may qualify for).
Why is it important to claim my Liberty account before I’m accepted?
Your Liberty account will give you access to your Student Checklist, which will walk you through every step you need to take to get accepted, registered, and ready for your first semester as a freshman or transfer student.
This account will be your main form of communication with the university. You’ll receive emails about scholarship opportunities, deadlines, and other important information, so make sure to check your inbox regularly.
Step 3 – Apply for Financial Aid 
Once you’ve been accepted, get excited! You’re coming to Liberty! Now there are just a few more things to take care of:
How do I receive financial aid?
Submit your FAFSA (Free Application for Federal Student Aid) 
FAFSA (Liberty code: 010392)
Apply for loans and grants
Complete Financial Check-In (FCI)
Remember that your Student Checklist will walk you through all of these processes.
Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA)
To be considered for federal grants, work study, loans, or Liberty University scholarships, you must submit your FAFSA by the deadline each year.
Remember these important numbers!
FAFSA (Liberty code: 010392)
Step 4 – Complete Financial Check-In
Congratulations on your acceptance! You can complete Financial Check-In after Oct. 1, 2023, and remember the deadline for new New Fall 2023 students is Aug. 11, 2023 ($150 late fee applied on Aug. 12). Keep in mind:
It takes 3-5 business days for your FAFSA to be processed and on file.
You will have more payment options available to you the earlier you complete Financial Check-In.
When you complete FCI, you will: 
Secure your housing
Choose a dining plan
Select a payment plan
Register your vehicle
Review and verify your account summary and financial aid
Step 5 – Register for Your First Courses
Congratulations on completing FCI! You can start registering for classes for the Fall Semester. Register through our Registration Tool or give us a call to get help with picking your courses.
Make sure to consult your degree completion plan and course guides to identify the best courses with which to start.
If you would like assistance in registering for your first set of courses, our admissions counselors are available by calling (800) 543-5317.
What else do I need to do to get ready for my first semester?
Complete your math and English assessments (you need to complete these before you register)
Buy your textbooks
Create a FERPA PIN
Get your Flames Pass
Complete your student health form
Important Terms to Know:
Claim Your Account
Once you apply to Liberty, you’ll be able to claim your personal LU account, which allows you to:
Access your Liberty University Student Checklist, which contains step-by-step instructions for staying on track with the enrollment process
Complete Financial Check-In (FCI) to secure your spot on campus (once you have been accepted)
Register for classes when registration opens for your term (Note: you must first complete FCI)
Claim your account >
FERPA PIN (Personal Identification Number)
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) is a federal law that protects the privacy of student education records.
The private information in your student account — such as grades, class schedules, and financial aid awards — may not be released to anyone without your consent. Creating a FERPA PIN allows you to give your parents or guardians access to this information.
Enrollment Deposit
Most schools require some sort of deposit during the enrollment process — that’s normal. Some use it as a firm RSVP, while others apply it toward housing or something similar.
At Liberty, your Enrollment Deposit serves as a down payment toward your first semester’s tuition. Additionally, submitting your Enrollment Deposit gives you access to additional scholarship funds — up to $10,000 worth! Check out other benefits that will be available to you after submitting your Enrollment Deposit.
Flames Pass
Your Flames Pass is your official student ID card. You’ll use it to:
Attend campus activities and athletic events
Check out library books
Do laundry
Get into your dorm
Pay for meals
Ride the bus
Frequently Asked Questions
What is Liberty University’s application deadline?
Is there an application fee for Liberty University?
Is Liberty University hard to get into?
Is Liberty University a reputable school?
Does Liberty University use the Common App?
When does Liberty University send acceptance letters?
When is Liberty University’s regular decision deadline?
How can I contact Liberty’s admissions office?"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/tuition-and-fees/","Liberty’s activity fee covers a multitude of activities on campus: a gym membership to the LaHaye Recreation and Fitness Center, skiing and snowboarding lessons and equipment at Snowflex, mountain bikes, canoes, kayaks, and camping equipment at Hydaway Recreation Center; and entrance to many of Liberty’s exciting athletic events. And that’s just the beginning!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/virginia-residents/","See How Liberty is Even More Affordable for Virginia Residents
If you live in Virginia, you already know everything the Commonwealth has to offer — from mountains, beaches, and historical monuments to big cities, small towns, sophistication, and down-home hospitality. It has a little bit of everything.
It’s home.
So get the private college experience you want while staying in the place you love. Liberty’s Virginia-specific grants and scholarships give you the opportunity to go away to college — while staying close to home.
You’ll qualify for at least $1,500 per year just for being a Virginia resident.
There’s No Place Like Home — to get a World-Class Education
Liberty University is centrally located, giving you stunning views of the Blue Ridge Mountains and easy access to Washington, D.C., Virginia Beach, and Charlotte, N.C. – all within a 3.5 to 4-hour drive.
It’s also one of the most affordable options in the state. Discover all the ways you can finance your education at Liberty through our scholarship opportunities.
Visit Liberty to see how close you already are to a great education.
Qualify for Virginia Scholarships
Virginia residents who attend Liberty University receive at least $1,500 per year in scholarships ($6,000 total over four years).
If you have a GPA of 3.4 or higher and live on campus your first year of enrollment, you’ll receive a minimum of $2,300 per year ($9,200 total over four years).
Lynchburg City high school graduates (E.C. Glass or Heritage High School) who have a GPA of 3.4 or higher will receive $4,300 per year ($17,200 total over four years) for school. Plus, you’ll receive an additional $2,000 per year to help with a meal plan. That’s $25,200 in all.
Qualify for the Virginia Tuition Assistance Grant (VTAG) and you could receive even more. Eligible students received an additional $5,000 in the 2023-24 school year.*
*VTAG award projections are estimated awards until a final State budget is approved and passed. Therefore, amounts are subject to change.
Virginia Scholarships and Grants
Liberty Virginia High-Achiever Scholarship
Lynchburg Beacon of Hope – Stay Close, Go Far Promise Program
Virginia: Brown v. Board of Education Scholarship
Virginia Tuition Assistance Grant (VTAG)
Virginia Two Year College Transfer Grant
Along with our advanced accreditations, we also have been recognized by the following organizations for our excellence in education:
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation..
Our commitment to our servicemembers has allowed us to rank as a Top 10 Military Friendly School."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/financial-aid/","College and Finances
Statistics show that college graduates (with a bachelor’s degree) can earn twice as much as high school graduates, and their average lifetime earnings can range from $800,000 to $2 million.*
So while paying for college might feel like a financial challenge, an investment in education is an investment in your future. Many people don’t end up paying sticker price for school. Scholarships, grants, loans — all of these can make college more affordable.
Because Liberty’s mission is Training Champions for Christ, our goal is to find financial solutions that give you the best education for the most affordable price — so you can focus on finding the degree program that fits you, not on settling for something less somewhere else.
Take a look at some of the many financial opportunities you’ll find at Liberty.
*The Hamilton Project
A Liberty education is one of the most affordable private educations in the country. Learn how the financial aid verification process works.
Ready for an Affordable Education?
Apply NowRequest Info
Did You Know?
Every CFAW hosts scholarship workshops with helpful tips for funding your education.
Every CFAW hosts scholarship workshops with helpful tips for funding your education.
96% of Liberty students receive financial aid.
CASAS regularly offers scholarship search workshops and tips for current students.
You could receive approximately $80,000 in scholarships over four years.
Following Mom or Dad to LU? If so, you could be eligible for $1,000 per year through our Legacy Scholarship.
Liberty’s average academic scholarship is $3,300 per year.
The School of Music offers over 70 scholarships to music students.
Liberty’s Center for Financial Literacy offers free biblically based financial training for Liberty students.
Middle America Scholarship
Our Middle America Scholarship helps students who don’t receive a full Federal Pell Grant by funding the difference, providing over $20,000 over four years to families who typically earn $35,000-$95,000 per year.
Need-based Vs. Merit-based Aid
What qualifies you for particular scholarships or grants? Two things: Your financial need and your academic, athletic, or other talent-based achievements.
Need-based financial aid is awarded to you based on your family’s financial need, as determined by the Free Application for Federal Student Aid — better known as the FAFSA.
When you submit a FAFSA, the federal government takes into account your family’s income, assets, number of children, etc. and determines your Expected Family Contribution (EFC), or what is reasonable for your family to help pay toward a college education. Need-based aid uses the EFC to determine award eligibility and amounts.
Merit-based financial aid is made up of scholarships or grants that you earn. At Liberty, this could include academic scholarships like our Academic, Honors, Valedictorian/Salutatorian, or National Merit scholarships. Or it could mean trying out for a scholarship position on one of our 20 NCAA Division 1 athletic teams, Marching Band, or ministry teams.
Both need-based and merit-based scholarships are considered gift aid, which means you don’t have to pay them back.
Debunking the FAFSA Myths
Now that you know the difference between need-based and merit-based financial aid, you probably are wondering about FAFSA. 
How important is the FAFSA?
How much will it cost me?
Will completing the FAFSA get me deeper in debt?
Will it commit me to Liberty University?
Check out our informative video on the FAFSA myths and get educated on how to fund your education.
Scholarships 
Liberty offers a wide variety of institutional scholarships, both need-based and merit-based, to help you pay for school — you can even receive $2,000 just for sending in your Enrollment Deposit on time.
There are countless ways to create a personal scholarship package — here are some of our most common combinations. See if these apply to you or design one of your own! 
Canadian Student Initiative
Central Virginia Community College (CVCC)
Liberty Academic Scholarship
Liberty Local Private School Scholarship
Liberty Virginia High-Achiever Scholarship
Lynchburg Beacon of Hope – Stay Close, Go Far Promise Program
Middle America Scholarship
Missionary Kid Scholarship
Valedictorian/Salutatorian
Grants
Grants are gift aid that can be need-based or merit-based and are given by the government or the university.
Here are a few of the grants you could receive as a Liberty student.
FAFSA School Code: 010392
Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant (FSEOG)
Liberty Supplemental Grant
Liberty Scholars Grant Program (Undergraduate)
Virginia Tuition Assistance Grant (VTAG)
Virginia Two-Year College Transfer Grant
Virginia: Brown vs. Board of Education
Loans
At Liberty University, we value our students’ ability to make an impact after graduation — without being held back by unnecessary debt. So, while student loans can be a good means to complete your degree program, we always advocate smart borrowing.
A variety of private loans through banks and individual lenders exist, but there are three main types of federal student loans: Direct Subsidized, Direct Unsubsidized, and Parent PLUS loans.
Direct Subsidized
Available to undergraduate students based on your financial need
The U.S. Department of Education pays the interest on the loan:
While you’re in school at least half-time
For the first six months after you leave school (known as a “grace period”)
During a period of deferment (a postponement of loan payments)
Direct Unsubsidized
Available to undergraduate and graduate students; need is not a requirement
You are responsible for paying the interest on the loan during all periods.
If you choose not to pay the interest on the loan while you are in school, during the grace period, or during deferment, your interest will accumulate and be added to the base amount of your loan.
Parent PLUS
Available to parents of dependent undergraduate students
As a parent borrower, you’ll generally be expected to start making payments once your loan is fully paid out.
You may request deferment while your child is in school or during the grace period, but interest will continue to accumulate.
Learn More about Federal Student Loans
Academic and Honors Program Scholarships
Your high school grades and test scores could be worth at least $1,500 per year — and up to a full tuition scholarship. See if you qualify for the Liberty Academic Scholarship, or become an LU honors student and enjoy smaller class sizes, specialized housing, and a designated study space, The Scholars Commons, at the Jerry Falwell Library.
National Merit Finalists, Semi-finalists, and Commended students can earn full tuition; National Merit Finalists receive full room and board as well.
Learn More >
Work-study Funding
A part-time job on or off campus can also bring in funds for school. Federal work-study positions can provide you up to $5,000 per academic year, depending on your FAFSA. Work-study is considered need-based aid, and you’ll know you’re eligible for a work-study position if it’s offered in your financial aid offer.
Little known fact: Unlike income from other jobs, your Federal Work Study wages are not counted toward next year’s expected family contribution (EFC) from the FAFSA.
Learn More >
Program-specific, Ministry, or Leadership Scholarships
Do you sing or play an instrument? Want to fly a plane? Feel called to leadership? Liberty’s multiple ministry teams — like the Sounds of Liberty, LU Praise, and the Liberty Worship Collective — offer scholarship positions. Many individual schools, including the School of Music and the School of Aeronautics, offer their own program-specific scholarships.
While underclassmen are not eligible for Resident Assistant positions, hall leadership scholarships are available to those who qualify.
Interested in applying for a scholarship? Here are a few departments and offices offering scholarships:
School of Aeronautics
School of Health Sciences: Allied Health Professions
School of Music
Office of Equity and Inclusion: OEI Fellowship
Debate Team
Liberty Worship Collective
Additionally, go here to find out about additional Outside Scholarships. 
General Scholarship Rule (GSR)
Your combined federal grants, state grants, and Liberty aid cannot exceed the combined cost of actual tuition and Tier 2 room and standard board charges. For commuter students, the GSR calculation only includes the cost of tuition since there is no room and board charge, which means federal grants, state grants, and Liberty aid cannot exceed the actual cost of tuition. 
If the combined aid exceeds the total cost as specified, Liberty aid will be reduced to resolve the excess aid. The Federal Pell Grant is not included as a factor in the GSR for Resident students. All Liberty aid is subject to the GSR.
Liberty University reserves the right to change the terms and conditions of any scholarship at any time at its discretion, as well as suspend or terminate any scholarships."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/financial-check-in-fci/","Do you want to live near the library or the lacrosse fields?
Take the elective you want first semester — or second semester?
Financial Check-In (FCI) is your gateway to everyday life at Liberty. And the earlier you complete it, the more freedom you’ll have to customize your campus experience.
What does Financial Check-In do for you?
Every Liberty student must complete Financial Check-In before beginning classes — but there are advantages to completing it early.
You’ll have…
Access to our most generous scholarship package
An invitation to register early for classes
Lower monthly payments (longer payment plans)
Your choice of premium housing options
Housing and class registration fill up quickly, and students who have completed FCI get first choice. So if you have your heart set on a particular living area or class schedule, make sure you complete Financial Check-In as soon as it opens.
You’ll love life at Liberty no matter where you live or what you study — FCI simply locks in what that looks like.
FCI deadline: New Fall 2023 students: Aug. 11, 2023
Make sure you don’t miss the FCI deadlines – you could lose your courses and pay a $150 late fee."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/undergraduate/confirm-now/","Invest in Your Future Today
The college enrollment process is a series of big decisions — and you want to feel confident you’re making smart ones.
So, before you submit your fully refundable $250 Enrollment Deposit, it’s important you find out why.
Most schools require some sort of deposit during the enrollment process — that’s normal. Some use it as a firm RSVP, others apply it toward housing or something similar.
At Liberty, your Enrollment Deposit gives you access to additional scholarship funds — up to $10,000 worth! And the earlier you submit it, the more benefits you have available.
What kinds of benefits?
Scholarships like the Champion Award – more than 80% of our students receive this need-based $8,000 scholarship that is spread out over four years at Liberty. Eligibility is based on the Expected Family Contribution (EFC) determined by the FAFSA.
The opportunity to live like a college student for 3 days on Liberty’s campus in Lynchburg, Va., at College For A Weekend (CFAW). You’ll attend classes, eat in our award-winning dining hall, and hear from a leading influencer in entertainment, business, government, or ministry — for free! (saving you $50)
A free application! When you call and speak to an admissions counselor, you can apply and submit your Enrollment Deposit at the same time — and the application fee will be on us. (saving you another $50)
Early Deposit Award – receive up to $2,000 in awards for your first year at Liberty.
Spring 24 Students – deposit by September 30, 2023, to receive the full $1,000 Early Deposit Award!
Fall 24 Students – deposit by September 30, 2023, to receive the full $2,000 Early Deposit Award!

Spring 25 Students – deposit by September 30, 2023, to receive the full $1,000 Early Deposit Award!
If you’re a high school junior, and you’re getting ahead of the game by submitting your Enrollment Deposit now, you’ll lock in the highest possible scholarship amount, get to attend one CFAW for free (at any point throughout your junior or senior year), and not have to worry about taking any other steps until Financial Check-In opens in January of your senior year of high school.
Making smart decisions throughout your enrollment process can make a big impact on your college education — and whatever comes after graduation. Contact us today to learn more.
Payment Methods
Deposit online
Deposit by calling an Admissions Representative at (800) 543-5317 
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.: 10 a.m.-9 p.m. (EST)
Wed.: 9 a.m.-6 p.m. (EST)
Sat.: 10 a.m.-6 p.m. (EST)
Enrollment Deposit Refund Policy
Your Enrollment Deposit will be applied as a credit toward your Liberty University account for your first semester of attendance.
An Enrollment Deposit may be refunded only if the request is in writing and received by May 1 for fall applicants and December 1 for spring applicants. This deadline date is determined by your initial intended application term.
All Enrollment Deposit refund requests are submitted through email to admissions@liberty.edu.
The Enrollment Deposit is non-transferable and non-refundable after the above deadlines but may be deferred for up to one academic year should the student decide to attend in a subsequent semester. However, if the student updates his/her application and Enrollment Deposit to any other semester, he/she will no longer be eligible for a refund.
Have Any Questions?
Admissions Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m.
Message and data rates may apply. For additional information, text HELP to 49596. You may opt-out at any time by sending STOP to 49596. Visit for Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/clubs-and-activities/","Your Campus. Your Culture. Your Connections.
College is a fresh start. It’s a place where you can reinvent yourself or shine a new light on the things you’ve always loved.
It’s a time for your longtime hobbies to be shared with friends or your talents to be appreciated — even among strangers. It’s an opportunity for you to flourish.
At Liberty, we believe in enabling our students to create a culture that fosters warmth, encouragement, and a healthy community.
So what does Liberty’s social scene offer you? Lots of free events that allow you to be yourself, try new things, make good friends, and have a great time.
If this becomes your campus and your culture, you’re going to love getting plugged into it. Read on to find out more about Liberty University’s student organizations and clubs!
There’s always something to do at Liberty University. From football games and concerts to intramural sports and film festivals, we have something for everyone. Your schedule may be packed, but make sure you take time to clear your head and have fun at one of Liberty University’s activities or clubs. Liberty’s Student Activities department works hard to plan over 100 exciting events each year, so you’ll never be bored!
In addition to providing a world-class education, a solid Christian foundation, and the knowledge and skills essential for impacting the world, Liberty also offers numerous recreational activities. Maybe you want to dive deeper into your academic discipline, or maybe you want to get outdoors and make memories with friends. Either way, there are many student activities at Liberty University for you to choose from.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
You could learn a new skill at a workshop, join one of Liberty’s clubs, enjoy an outdoor movie with friends, or perform with the Flamettes, Liberty University’s dance team. Our thriving athletics program also features over 20 intramural sports teams and athletic teams in 40 club sports, if you’re looking to play sports recreationally.
Campus life is an important part of Liberty University — and we offer many opportunities for you to find your niche and explore your interests. Check out Liberty’s activities below!
Want to know what’s going on now? Check out Liberty University’s Student Activities Calendar to stay up-to-date with what’s coming up next! And visit our Campus Life page for more information about things to do at Liberty University.
What Activities Does Liberty Offer?
Block Party
Start the school year off right with the best annual “Welcome Back” event around. Live music, food trucks, carnival rides, and fireworks make this beloved fall tradition a night to remember.
And because Liberty supports local talent and local vendors, you’ll get to enjoy them both at this lively back-to-school party.
You’ll also be introduced to many of the university’s departments and student-led clubs, allowing you to make connections that will last throughout your time at Liberty — and beyond.
Coffeehouse
Sing. Dance. Perform. Or join thousands of your closest friends screaming, applauding, and packing out the Vines Center for Liberty’s own legendary variety show — Coffeehouse.
Showcasing the talent here on campus, Coffeehouse features student performances in music, dance, and video production. With a different theme each semester, Coffeehouse gives students a diverse platform and a wide variety of opportunities to display their gifts.
Coffeehouse has become more than just a place where people perform — it’s a place where Liberty’s community and culture can thrive.
What else is there to do around campus?
Outdoor movie night on the lawn
“Every Square Inch” conference on culture and theology
Concerts and Open Mic Nights
From top artists like Rend Collective, Skillet, Tori Kelly, and Andy Mineo to student bands and local musicians, the concert scene at Liberty draws some of the best talent in the industry. We offer a variety of concerts every month that feature everything from big names to brand-new bands.
Want to get your own break on stage? Whether you’re a singer, musician, comedian, or speaker, Open Mic nights at the Argo Tea Café are a great way for you to get in front of a crowd. Or you can grab a seat in the audience with some friends and cheer on your fellow students as they perform. Either way, don’t miss some of the best Tuesdays of the school year!
Student-Led Clubs
Liberty offers more than 100 student-led clubs, giving you the opportunity to connect with other people who love what you love. And, if you want to hone your academic skills and boost your résumé, we also offer a variety of honor societies. There’s something for everyone — and our club presidents are always eager to welcome new members!
Liberty University’s student clubs span many different topics and activities, including creative writing, cyber defense, robotics, politics, philosophy, fencing, anime, public relations, and more! Check out the full list of clubs at Liberty University to see where you’d fit in best."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/athletics/","Welcome to Flames Nation
This is where grit and grace meet the gridiron. The ice. The field. The track. The pool.
It’s where athletes play with passion — and then pray with their competitors after the game, win or lose.
It’s a D1 experience with conviction. A fan favorite that’s also a family favorite.
2021 LendingTree Bowl Champions
So be early. Be loud. Wear red.
Because this is Flames Nation — and we’re here to change the game.
Check Out the Action Live on Flames TV!
“Liberty has some of the best athletic facilities in the whole world. I’ve trained in Olympic pools from Italy to Egypt, and the facilities here amazed me. That was one of the reasons I chose Liberty to begin with — as well as the Christian education.”
— Junior Charles Fernandez, two-time Olympic athlete, 2015 Pan Am Games Modern Pentathlon winner, first to win back-to-back gold at the Pan Am Games, and member of Liberty’s Men’s Swimming and Diving team
NCAA Division 1 Sports
Liberty Lady Flames softball team
Come out and cheer on our 20 teams playing at the highest collegiate level — in the ASUN conference, the BIG EAST, CCSA, and as an independent in the FBS. Tickets to all regular season match-ups are free to Liberty students.*
Flames Football battles it out on the gridiron against schools like Syracuse, Louisiana, Rutgers, UMass, BYU, UVA, and other fierce FBS opponents and has been ranked in the AP poll’s Top 25. Check out all the action and learn about more Liberty’s NCAA programs at LibertyFlames.com.
*Please note that many athletic matchups in the 2020-21 academic year have been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Please go to LibertyFlames.com for the most up-to-date information on all NCAA Div. I sporting events.
Liberty competes in these sports at the NCAA Division 1 level:
Men’s:
Baseball
Basketball
Cross Country
Football
Golf
Soccer
Tennis
Track and Field
Women’s:
Basketball
Cross Country
Field Hockey
Lacrosse
Soccer
Softball
Swimming and Diving
Tennis
Track and Field
Volleyball
Did You Know?
In October 2020, Liberty blitzed into the AP Top 25 for the first time in program history with a 6-0 record.
In October 2020, Liberty blitzed into the AP Top 25 for the first time in program history with a 6-0 record.
Liberty Football won its first bowl game in program history in the Cure Bowl on Dec. 21, 2019, in Orlando, Fla.
Liberty’s NCAA Division I program has won over 140 conference titles.
In 2019, the Lady Flames Division I hockey team won their third national championship.
In the university’s inaugural season in the ASUN conference, Liberty was awarded the Bill Bibb Trophy, recognizing the school as the conference’s top overall athletics program for 2018-19.
In 2018, Liberty Flames Football became the ninth team in NCAA history to win six or more games during its inaugural season in the FBS.
Liberty Athletics has captured a conference All-Sports Award trophy 15 times in the past 22 years, including 14 Sasser Cup titles (in the Big South Conference).
Liberty University men’s basketball Head Coach Ritchie McKay was named the 2019 Jim Phelan National Coach of the Year, an award presented annually to the top coach in NCAA Division I men’s basketball.
The Flames captured the ASUN Men’s Basketball Championship, punching their ticket to the NCAA Tournament as a No. 12 seed. The Flames upended No. 5 seed Mississippi State in the first round of the NCAA Tournament, marking the first time the team has picked up a win in the “Big Dance” in their fourth trip to the tournament.
Liberty’s only NCAA programs not competing in the ASUN conference are football, which will enter its third season as an FBS independent, field hockey (BIG EAST Conference), and women’s swimming and diving (CCSA).
Senior men’s track standout Alejandro Perlaza Zapata represented his native Colombia in the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio and is headed to Tokyo in 2020.
Flames triathlete Giovanni Bianco, a graduate student from Italy, won the 20-24-year-old long-course triathlon division at the Multisport World Championship Festival in Denmark, in July 2018.
In January, Liberty University’s men’s wrestling team became the first team in the NCWA National Duals tournament’s 11-year history to defend its national title.
The 2019 State Games of America were hosted on Liberty’s campus.
In October, Flames Baseball traveled to the Dominican Republic to lead a youth baseball clinic on a field shared by the San Francisco Giants. Players and coaching staff also visited an orphanage for disabled children, delivered food to an outlying village, played games against local teams, and shared the gospel wherever they went.
Club Sports
Liberty’s Club Sports program is modeled after an NCAA Division III athletics department and is unlike any other in the country. With 39 teams and more than 700 members and coaches, as well as professional-grade facilities and training areas, Liberty’s Club Sports programs bring serious match-ups and exhilarating competition to the Liberty arena.
Check them out and cheer them on — because the real secret to our home-field advantage is our fans. 
Liberty competes in these sports at the Club Sports level:
Hockey Division I
Hockey Division II
Hockey Division III
Lacrosse
Paintball
Shooting
Swimming & Diving
Ultimate
Volleyball
Wrestling
The Liberty Flames Sports Network (LFSN)
Want to catch all the Flames action — even when you can’t be at the game? Tune into the Liberty Flames Sports Network (LFSN), Liberty’s radio and television networks that have been covering Flames athletics since 1981.
Liberty sports events can be viewed on all satellite and cable systems throughout Southwestern and Central Virginia on WFFP Channel 24. They are also broadcast on outlets across the nation, including the Mid- Atlantic Sports Network (MASN), ESPN3, Cox Television Network, American Sports Network (ASN), The Walk, and various independent stations, representing more than 40 million households coast-to-coast.
Make sure you also catch Game On, LFSN’s weekly update on all things Liberty Athletics. 
College Football Fun at LU Starts Long Before Kickoff…
Student Flames Club
Promote school spirit, enhance the game-day atmosphere, and connect with Liberty’s athletics programs by joining the Student Flames Club.
Available to all residential and online students, membership costs range between $25 (one-year) and $75 (four-year), and give you the following benefits:
Flames Fan Fest
The game-day experience begins long before the football team takes the field.
Two hours prior to kickoff at each home game, Liberty Athletics hosts the ultimate fan experience with the Flames Fan Fest inside the Liberty University Indoor Practice Facility."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/students/","Who You Are Matters
As a unique individual with gifts, abilities, dreams, and ideals, you have an important contribution to make to the world. College is a time to examine the things that make you “you” and fashion them into a future you can be proud of.
You may want to prepare for a successful career.
Or find ways to repair the world.
Or become part of a bigger, better story.
Your college career should equip you to do all these things — and more.
At Liberty University, we recognize your value isn’t just in what you’re going to do, but in who you are. So our programs, departments, and activities are designed to help you develop as a person, not just as a student.
What Makes Liberty Unique?
Campus Serve was started in 2002 — every week, around 150 students still serve Lynchburg through work projects, children’s ministry, elderly care, and poverty alleviation.
Liberty students serve at over 1,500 organizations per year.
Campus Serve was started in 2002 — every week, around 150 students still serve Lynchburg through work projects, children’s ministry, elderly care, and poverty alleviation.
LU students, faculty, and staff packed nearly 5,000 boxes for Operation Christmas Child (through Samaritan’s Purse) in December 2018.
Half a million volunteer hours are given to the community every year by LU students (that’s the equivalent of investing $3 million into the local community).
LU’s Habitat for Humanity Club has built two houses since 2014, and just received a $20,000 grant (alongside schools like Clemson and Purdue) from State Farm to build their third.
LU and Virginia Tech worked together to raise $36,000 for hurricane relief efforts through an exhibition basketball game in November 2018.
Every building on Liberty’s campus built over the last eight years uses energy-saving and water-saving technologies.
Liberty’s food service, Sodexo, donates any leftover edible food to local organizations that feed the needy.
Between residential and online courses, Liberty offers over 700 unique degree programs.
Liberty has its own humanitarian aid organization that sends students across the country and around the world when natural disasters hit.
Liberty sent students to Jackson, Kentucky, to join Samaritan’s Purse in their work of assisting residents whose homes were affected by the devastating floods in July. They also sent a group to Poland to help Ukrainian refugees.
In both 2018 and 2019, Family and Consumer Sciences students raised more than $4,000 for local organizations and nonprofits through class projects.
Over 6,000 diapers and 80 baby items were collected during Liberty’s Law Students for Life Club 2019 prayer breakfast and donated to the Blue Ridge Pregnancy Center.
Liberty sent faculty, staff, and students on 24 trips during Spring Break 2019. Projects included preparing housing for incoming refugees in Spain, teaching music to children in Nicaragua, and providing trauma counseling for sex trafficking victims in India.
You may be asking, “How will I know if this school is right for me?” or “How will this school prepare me for a successful future?”
Those are good questions. You’ll find answers to them — and to other commonly asked questions — below.
Did You Know?
Liberty’s Food Court at Reber Thomas features more than 22 unique food stations, including the award-winning Simple Servings, which offers meals prepared without gluten and seven of the most common food allergens.
Liberty was ranked among the top 3 safest campuses in Virginia and in the top 10% of safest campuses in America for 2023 by Niche.com.
96% of Liberty students receive some sort of financial aid.
Liberty was ranked in the top 5 best dining halls in the country for the past 4 years by BestColleges.com.
Residential students can also take online courses to maximize both time and money.
Regular bus routes transport students on and off campus.
Liberty’s Food Court at Reber Thomas features more than 22 unique food stations, including the award-winning Simple Servings, which offers meals prepared without gluten and seven of the most common food allergens.
Our technical studies program allows students to take electives or add a minor in carpentry, welding, HVAC, electrical, or plumbing.
Liberty was ranked as one of 2019’s Top 5 college campuses and Top 10 best dorms in the nation by Niche.com.
Liberty’s 24/7 Prayer initiative means that prayer requests submitted by students are being prayed for 24 hours/day and 7 days/week."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/recreation/","Hanging out with friends is important — and your time with them is valuable.
You want to make memories that are as unique as you are.
At Liberty, you’ll find a wide variety of opportunities to kickback outside the classroom, meeting new people, building teamwork, and just having fun. You’ll never have an excuse to be bored.
And because Liberty’s campus is tucked into the heart of the Blue Ridge Mountains, the natural beauty surrounding LU makes it a special place to connect with nature — and with your Creator. You’ll find everything from quiet moments by breathtaking sunsets and star-studded night skies to high adventure trips and your favorite outdoor sports.
Liberty’s ever-changing natural backdrop makes it the ideal spot for some of the best, and most unique, memories of your life — come and see for yourself. 
Check out all the ways you can experience life at Liberty.
“Because of our local geography and top-tier facilities, Liberty students have the chance to participate in a very diverse and unique range of opportunities. There aren’t many campuses where you could climb a rock wall on Monday, play Spikeball on Tuesday, go out on a challenge course (high-ropes) on Wednesday, swim in the indoor pool on Thursday, go kayaking on Friday, and then run in a 5K on Saturday.”
— Chris Misiano, Vice President of Campus Recreation
Intramural Sports
Want to keep playing your favorite sport — but not at the collegiate level? No problem! Liberty’s thriving Intramural Sports department offers you over 20 different sports so you can keep up your skills without investing the time it takes to be a college athlete.
And you’ll meet a lot of great new people — Liberty’s Intramural Sports program has one of the highest participation rates in the country. Nearly 25 percent of residential undergraduate students play on a team!
Choose to join an intramural team and play:
3-Point Shootout
4v4 Flag Football
Basketball
Billiards (8-Ball)
Bowling
Broomball
Coed Beach Volleyball
Coed Kickball
Coed Volleyball
Disc Golf
Dodgeball
Fantasy Football
Flag Football
Indoor Soccer
Outdoor Soccer
Racquetball
Slam Dunk Contest
Softball
Spikeball
Table Tennis
Tennis
Ultimate Frisbee
Whiffleball
What else can you do for fun around Liberty?
Go bowling at the Montview Bowling Alley.
Go bowling at the Montview Bowling Alley.
Challenge friends to epic video game battles in our Game Room.
Work out at the LaHaye Recreation & Fitness Center or at our newly renovated David’s Place
Go swimming at the Liberty Natatorium.
Take an exercise class or play basketball or racquetball at the LaHaye Fitness and Recreation Center.
Get your goal on at the Thomas Indoor Soccer Center.
Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre
No matter what season it is, you can always go skiing, snowboarding, or tubing at Liberty University. The Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre is one of North America’s only year-round ski hills of its kind and is home to Liberty’s Men’s and Women’s Ski and Snowboard teams.
Ski or snowboard lessons, equipment rentals, and tubing passes are free to LU students, and the Barrick-Falwell Lodge is a cozy place to study, catch up with friends, or catch a stunning sunset over the Blue Ridge Mountains.
LaHaye Ice Center
Home to Liberty’s five hockey teams, figure skating team, and synchronized skating team, the LaHaye Ice Center is not only an action-packed competition arena — it also gives students opportunities for:
Pick-up hockey games
Skating lessons
Freestyle skating
Learn more about the Lahaye Ice Center and all other recreational opportunities available to you through Liberty’s Campus Rec department.
Outdoor Recreation
Are you an outdoor enthusiast? At Liberty, you’ll find plenty of opportunities to take in God’s creation and relax on our more than 7,000 acres of Blue Ridge Mountain beauty. 
Head up to Liberty Mountain, where you’ll enjoy over 50 miles of single- and double-track trails that are perfect for cross country running, hiking, or biking.
Or take a break at the Hydaway Outdoor Recreation Center. Our sandy beach and designated swimming area provide the perfect spot for all your lakefront fun. Here, you’ll be able to:
Swim
Canoe
Paddleboard
Kayak
Fish
Go camping
Challenge yourself and others on a high-ropes course
Fly down a zipline
Campsite gear and equipment rentals are free for students.
Adventure Trips
Want to get away for the day or the weekend? Liberty offers dozens of adventure trips designed to help you unwind. Go camping, hiking, or horseback riding in the nearby Blue Ridge Mountains, try your hand at fly fishing or bouldering, or get your adrenaline pumping by white water rafting or kayaking in West Virginia or skiing and snowboarding at nearby Wintergreen Resort.
Our experienced trip leaders will guide you through getaway opportunities like these and other exciting activities:
Mountain biking
Rappelling and rock climbing
Fly fishing
Spelunking
Sailing
Moonlight horseback riding
Whitewater rafting
Camping
Astronomical Observatory
The Psalmist said it best: “The heavens declare the glory of God, and the sky above proclaims His handiwork” (Psalm 19:1).
Find prime viewing for stargazing with open space and minimal light noise at Liberty’s own astronomical observatory. Just a little over five miles from campus, the observatory gives you a closer look at moons, planets, nebulae, galaxies, and more.
See them all through the largest telescope in the region — a 24-inch DFM Engineering telescope. The telescope sits one story off the ground, giving you a spectacular view of the sky. Or, enjoy a clear and wide field of view with one of our 8-inch Celestron telescopes.
The observatory is open for free night sky viewing to Liberty University students, faculty and staff, and their guests."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/scholars-programs/","Continue to Achieve Amazing Things with Programs Made for Scholars Like You
You’ve worked hard to get to where you are — from spending Friday nights finishing another AP assignment instead of going out with friends, to taking a full load of classes each and every year. These are just some of the sacrifices you have made. You deserve to be proud of all you’ve done and where it’s led you. And at Liberty, your hard work pays off.
Depending on your academic goals, you can pursue our Honors Program or our Eagle Scholars Program. Both of these prestigious programs allow you to register for classes early – giving you a leg up on getting the classes and professors you want!
If you have any questions about moving forward in the enrollment process, you can call an admissions counselor at (800) 543-5317 today!
Are you ready to become a part of something that propels you forward? 
Apply Now Request Info
Liberty’s Honors Program
Surround Yourself with Like-Minded People Who are as Passionate about Academic Achievement as You!
Join a community of students who are serious about their education.
Our Honors alumni include a five-time Jeopardy champion, an NFL football player, an MLB-drafted Academic All-American, the first female student government president, the Big South Player of the Year in women’s soccer, and nationally-ranked debaters and Quiz Bowl players.
Some of the benefits you’ll receive in the Honors Program include:
Priority early registration for classes
Smaller and more challenging classes with a student to professor ratio of 15:1
$4,000 scholarship for each year that you are an honors student
Learn more about the Honors Program and how you can start the application process.
Competitive Acceptance
SAT and ACT Scores
Questions? Check out our Frequently Asked Questions section below!
What Does Being a Liberty Honors Student Look Like?
FIRST TWO YEARS
Honors students who enter as freshmen will need to take 8 Honors seminars within their first 2 years.
The Honors seminars are 100-200 level, discussion-driven classes that fit into your Gen Ed requirements and have a much smaller student to professor ratio (15:1).
JUNIOR YEAR
Once you’ve completed your lower-level Honors seminars, you’ll take 3 upper-level Honors petition courses in your major.
A petition course is an opportunity for you to study more deeply via a learning contract that is agreed upon between you and your professor.
SENIOR YEAR
The Senior Honors Thesis is the capstone project that seniors complete after 2 to 3 years of advanced study.
The purpose of this course (HONR 495) is to give you an opportunity to research a topic of your choice under the guidance of a committee of 3 senior faculty members and the Honors director.
Eagle Scholars Program
Develop Professionalism You Can Take Anywhere
The Eagle Scholars Program provides high-achieving freshmen and sophomores, regardless of major, personal and professional development that cultivates leadership skills for college and beyond. Students build community as they work together through experiential curricula.
Some of the benefits you’ll receive in this program include:
Priority early registration for classes
Personal development to prepare you for university leadership opportunities
Professional development training to increase the likelihood of internships and employment
Preferred Housing choice on the eighth floor of Commons 2. Students enjoy sharing this Hall with other Eagle Scholars. This promotes connecting with others and encouragement for academic achievement
Attend exclusive events, retreats, volunteer outreach and trips
Apply to the Eagle Scholars Program today!
Eligibility
Requirements
What Does Being an Eagle Scholar Look Like?
FIRST SEMESTER:
Connecting with Others
Team-building retreat at Hydaway Outdoor Center
Social Connection Event designed to meet other Program students and faculty
Christmas Celebration
SECOND SEMESTER:
Self-Leadership
Spring Eagle Games (competition and fun with freshmen classmates)
Special Individualized Projects
End of Spring Celebration
THIRD SEMESTER:
Leading Others
Sophomore hosted welcome events for new students
Habitat for Humanity build in Altavista, Va
First Year Experience project
FOURTH SEMESTER:
Changing Culture
Ministry capstone projects and trips with faculty guidance
Group presentation research and filming based on relevant topics
End of Spring Celebration to honor the sophomores’ completion of the Program
FAQs for the Honors Program
Can I still be involved on campus?
Will I be overwhelmed in the program?
Can I get in if I’m a homeschooled student?
Can I get in if I’m an international student?
What if I’m already an LU student or I’m transferring in?
What if I have a National Merit Scholarship?
Have more questions about the Eagle Scholars Program?
Eagle Scholars FAQs"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/students/preparing-for-the-future/","Your future is like you — boundless, unique, and full of potential.
Maybe there are big issues you want to tackle. World problems you want to cripple. New ideas you want to introduce.
And you know the more equipped you are to succeed as a professional — and as a person — the better positioned you’ll be to accomplish everything you want to.
At Liberty, the power of your potential is what drives us to:
Innovate effective learning environments
Create realistic training scenarios
Invest in your ability to thrive — no matter what the situation
We think outside the box so that you’ll graduate with more than a well-respected degree — you’ll have the resiliency, soft skills, and leadership training to make you versatile and capable in any career you choose. Also, you’ll have the character and expertise that employers are looking for.
Because we can’t wait to see what God will do with your future.
Employers share why they know to seek out Liberty grads.
See what God can do with your future at Liberty
Apply NowRequest Info
How Does Liberty Responsibly Prepare Students for the Future?
By integrating soft skills and good morals/ethics into every degree program so LU students get a reputation as trustworthy employees who contribute to healthy corporate culture and the bottom line.
By dreaming big and looking ahead so you’ll have a degree that’s future-ready. 
By examining the job market and developing degree programs that fill growing career gaps.
By integrating as much real-world, relevant experience into programs as possible — so you can graduate ready to flourish. 
By integrating soft skills and good morals/ethics into every degree program so LU students get a reputation as trustworthy employees who contribute to healthy corporate culture and the bottom line.
Academics
Liberty offers more than 300 residential degrees through 15 colleges and schools
Explore how your skills, interests, and love for learning can be channeled into the degree that’s right for you
Learn more >
Academic Success
Liberty invests in every student’s potential to reach their dreams
Take advantage of tutoring, peer mentors, workshops, writing help, and more to get the most out of your college education
Learn more >
Practical Learning
To succeed as a professional, you need to train like one
Liberty’s wide range of industry-standard equipment, opportunities, and real-world experience can help you create a résumé employers notice — even before graduation
Learn more >
Convocation
College should be a safe space to question, challenge, and refine your perspective
Learn about big things happening in the world from the culture-makers themselves through Convocation
Learn more >
Leadership Training
Good leaders inspire great changes
Liberty offers multiple programs designed to help you develop practical, effective, and inspiring leadership skills
Learn more >
Career and Professional Development
Networking, internships, career coaching — it’s no wonder LU students are ready to take on whatever their future careers bring
Hear what employers have to say about why they love to hire Liberty grads
Learn more >"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/students/the-right-fit/","College Has Been on Your Mind for a While
It’s an exciting time where you’ll learn to solve big problems, engage with issues that are important to you, and get inspired to be your best. But deciding which college is right for you can feel like a huge decision — and a little overwhelming.
So, at Liberty, we’re committed to giving you a smooth, stress-free college search experience. We want you to easily find the answers you need to feel informed, comfortable, and ready to make a college decision you’re happy with.
How to Learn More
Take a look around the website: Our wide variety of pages, links, videos, and testimonials is designed to give you a comprehensive picture of what Liberty can offer you — both as a student and as a person. Dig in and get to know us!
Plan a visit: Virtual tours are great (Have you taken ours yet?), but there’s nothing like being on campus yourself to feel the Liberty difference. Whether you only have a few hours or want to spend four days on campus, you have several visiting options available. You really have to see Liberty’s campus to believe it, so start planning the visit that’s right for you.
Contact us: If coming to campus in person isn’t possible right now, feel free to chat us, email us, or give us a call. You will be connected with admissions counselors who are experienced and looking forward to answering all of your college questions.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find a welcoming environment that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to our values helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 2 most conservative colleges in America. That means we believe in things that keep our country great and help sustain our way of life – including God, family, and community.
Feel Like Liberty Is Right for You? 
Apply Now Request Info
Get to Know Liberty University
The Liberty Story
It started with a mountain and a dream. Learn more about how 54 students became over 100,000 in less than 50 years, and how a vision to Train Champions for Christ continues to make the world a better place. 
Who We Are
It’s been said that your people are your brand. Get to know some of the students, faculty, staff, and alumni who happily make up the Liberty brand — and who you might meet on campus.
What We Believe
As a Christian academic community, Liberty continues the philosophy of education which first gave rise to the university. Learn more about our convictions and how they shape our decisions. 
Plan a Visit
TourLU
Want to hit the highlights of LU? Take one of our daily campus tours, and you’ll get an overview of our campus, facilities, dorms, award-winning dining hall, and much more — you will also have the opportunity to apply to Liberty for free.
Tours happen Monday-Saturday at 9 a.m. and 2 p.m. and Sunday afternoons at 2 p.m.
ExperienceLU
If you want to dig a little deeper, learn more about a specific program, try out our dining options, and hear from representatives who will help you understand everything available to you through Liberty’s many student services, our one-day ExperienceLU is a great opportunity.
You can get an in-depth look at Liberty University — and apply for free. Check out our available dates or register now.
College For A Weekend (CFAW)
Deciding what to do with four years and your future is a big commitment. So, why not try out college life before you commit?
At CFAW, you’ll live like a college student for four days. Attend classes, meet professors, stay overnight in a dorm with current Liberty students, eat in our dining hall, explore campus, and take advantage of all the activities typical LU students do — like concerts, NCAA Division I sports, and Convocation. You’re anything but a typical student, so CFAW is anything but a typical college tour. Register today! 
Have any Questions?
Admissions Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m.
Message and data rates may apply. For additional information, text HELP to 49596. You may opt-out at any time by sending STOP to 49596. Visit for Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/students/living-at-liberty/","College is about getting a solid education — but it’s also about finding home for four years.
It’s finding a home with friends and mentors who support, encourage, and inspire you to live more like Christ every day.
It’s finding a home with comfort food — and culinary adventure.
It’s finding a home where you can relax at the end of every day — and still find something new to do every weekend.
At Liberty, we are a group of unique, passionate, interesting, bold, collaborative, inclusive individuals who are united as one beautifully diverse Body of Christ who want to experience university life to its fullest.
If that sounds like you, come see what it looks like to come home to Liberty.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Who Could You Meet While You’re Living Here?
“Being a missionary kid, I have done a lot of traveling and met many people, but never anyone like Jake. Of all the people I have met, Jake’s faithfulness is impressive. With his baseball cap on backwards, a smile on his face, and a discerning look in his eyes, Jake is always joyful — yet willing to sit down and talk about deeper struggles with anyone.
Jake has inspired me to take my Christian walk seriously, showed me the love of Christ, and modeled joy.”
— Peter B., Liberty student
“Emily has a very real passion for pursuing Christ in all she does. She lives a life of true faith, and this is shown in the way she conducts herself, as well as how she interacts with others.
Serving as a Resident Shepherd, she handles responsibility well while positively impacting those around her. Emily has helped many young men and women grow in Christ, encouraging us all to strengthen our individual relationships with God. She has brought both myself and another close friend to God, leading us to be saved and eventually baptized.”
— Sasha C., Liberty student
Housing
No matter where you live on campus, you’ll find a community to grow with, an environment to thrive in — and a place you can call home. Learn more about Liberty’s six main residence halls.
Dining
With over 24 dining options on campus — including Thai, Mediterranean, woodfire-grilled pizza, gluten- and allergy-free meals, and more — you’ll never go hungry. Find out more about our dining plans, variety of food options, and sustainable solutions.
Lynchburg
Food trucks, farmers’ markets, mountain vistas, and more. Learn how the warmth and charm of Lynchburg, “The Gem on the James,” is unlike anywhere else.
Health and Wellness
Work out, eat right, and get support. Find out about Liberty’s many ways to get — and stay — healthy.
LU student using equipment in the Liberty Athletics Center."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/students/on-campus-fun/","Half the fun of any great experience is having a good story to tell.
College is a time of story-making.
Of finding your people. Of cheering at the big game or playing to win in your own. Of working side-by-side with like-minded classmates to achieve something significant.
At Liberty, we create spaces for you to build a meaningful community because your story — and the role you play in the stories of others — is an important part of God’s story.
Here you’ll find countless opportunities to work, play, talk, laugh, inspire, entertain, and grow together — all in environments designed to give you an extraordinary sense of community.
So the experiences you have become some of your favorite stories to tell.
Read More
Take a look at the many ways you can make great memories on campus.
Looking for relaxing ways to spend your downtime?
You’ll find plenty of spaces on Liberty’s campus for unwinding.
Want to chat al fresco when it’s warm? You’ll find outdoor tables, chairs, and benches all across campus.
Want somewhere cozy when it’s cold? Settle in with a cup of coffee and friends in front of the fire at Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre’s Barrick-Falwell Lodge or in the basement of the Hancock Welcome Center.
Whether you want to gather with friends or get some quiet time to yourself, at Liberty, you’ll find a variety of comfortable environments that are “just right.”
Liberty students relaxing in the lodge at Snowflex
Looking for something fun to do with friends?
At Liberty, there’s always something going on!
Take a look at our campus calendar for up-to-date info on Student Activities events, theatre productions, art exhibits, conferences, film festivals, athletic events, and more!
Make your favorite college memories at Liberty
Apply NowRequest Info
Liberty University Theater Department performs Will Rogers Follies
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Liberty’s wide variety of fun activities and recreation means you can fill your free time with as much or as little excitement as you want. What could you get involved in?
Athletic Events
Be early. Be loud. Wear red.
That’s how we support our Liberty Flames here in Flames Nation.
With over 20 NCAA Division I sports and 39 Club Sports teams to cheer on, Liberty offers you the exciting, heart-pounding, college fan experience you’ve been looking for. Follow our teams, shout loud for our players, and cheer on our inspirational coaches — these are your Liberty Flames.
Check out ASUN, Big East, FBS, and CCSA team schedules, updates, and live coverage at LibertyFlames.com.
Excited about our hockey, volleyball, snowboarding, wrestling, and Tae Kwon Do teams? Learn about these and our other 39 club sports teams.
Catch all the latest sports news and updates at the Liberty Flames Sports Network (LFSN). Or watch the latest edition of Game On, LFSN’s weekly update on everything related to Liberty Athletics.
Go Flames!
Read More
Recreation
Finding ways to spend time with friends at Liberty is never a challenge. Whether you want to go bowling, skiing, paddleboarding, whitewater rafting, horseback riding, or stargazing, there are plenty of opportunities both on and off Liberty’s campus.
Or you can join the 25% of Liberty’s residential student body in playing one of 20 intramural sports — ranging from beach volleyball, flag football, softball, and Ultimate to basketball, racquetball, table tennis, and dodgeball.
No matter how you like to relax and have fun, you’ll find something you love to do at Liberty.
Student Activities
“Friendship is born at that moment when one person says to another: ‘What! You, too? I thought I was the only one.’” —C.S. Lewis
Meet the ones who share your interests and passions through over 100 student-led clubs. Or make memories with friends at more than 100 events offered through Student Activities each school year, including concerts, movie nights, art expos, and campus favorites such as Coffeehouse and Block Party.
Want to know what’s coming up soon? Check out the Student Activities calendar.
Liberty’s Life Standards
Live the best version of your life while you prepare to be the kind of leader others can believe in.
Your character is important — it’s what you’ll take with you into every job interview, performance review, and meaningful relationship of your life. At Liberty, we care about helping you cultivate it — and protect it. That’s why our standards for behavior are higher than at some other schools.
Because who you are and what you do matters.
So you won’t find Greek life at Liberty — but you will find a community of men and women who care about supporting one another, living life to the fullest, and having fun they won’t forget.
Read More"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/students/affording-liberty/","Affording College
Getting a good education is important.
So is having the freedom to get a good job after graduation and start making your mark — without being held back by unnecessary debt.
At Liberty University, we believe everyone should have an equal opportunity to pursue higher education, and it’s our job to keep that education affordable for you.
That’s why more than 95% of Liberty students receive some form of financial aid.
And it’s why we’re developing innovative financial solutions to help you out, like refusing to raise tuition costs for the 2023-24 school year, the fifth year in a row we have frozen tuition rates.
A Liberty education is one of the most affordable private educations in the country. Learn how it can be an affordable one for you.
Net price calculator
A net price is how much you’ll pay for college in a single academic year AFTER scholarship and grant money is subtracted. When you enter your information into our net price calculator, it will tell you how much students like you paid to attend Liberty last year, after taking financial aid into account.
Net Price Calculator >
College Cost Breakdown
Knowing up-front what you’re paying for and why can go a long way toward making you feel comfortable about your investment.
College Cost Breakdown >
What kinds of financial aid can I qualify for?
Scholarships, grants, loans — because Liberty’s mission is Training Champions for Christ, you’ll find a variety of financial solutions to help you get the best education for the most affordable price. There are countless ways to create a personal scholarship package — check out some of our most common combinations, or design one of your own!
Financial Aid >
Are there any perks to being in-state?
If you live in Virginia, you already know everything the Commonwealth has to offer — from mountains, beaches, and historical monuments to big cities, small towns, sophistication, and down-home hospitality. It has a little bit of everything. It’s home.
And if Liberty becomes your college home, you’ll qualify for at least $1,500 per year just for being a Virginia resident."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/students/safety-and-support/","Learn more about Liberty’s COVID-19 response and our strategies for maintaining students’ health and safety throughout the pandemic. 
Home is where you feel safe.
And at Liberty, we’re committed to fostering an environment where you feel safe — physically, emotionally, and socially.
Because sometimes life isn’t easy.
Here, Champions for Christ stand up for one another and joyfully celebrate the unique differences that bring us together as one glorious Body of Christ.
Whether it’s safeguarding campus through security measures and training or walking beside you through a painful season, we’ll be here for you — so you can be there for someone else.
Read More
Liberty was ranked among the top 3 safest campuses in Virginia and in the top 10% of safest campuses in America for 2023 by Niche.com.
At times, LUPD will work with the Lynchburg Police Department, other law enforcement agencies, and first responders to ensure your safety. The department also coordinates with Student Counseling Services, Community Life, Residence Life, the Office of Equity and Compliance, and Title IX.
LU SAFE RIDE: Students can request a police escort across campus at any time by calling the LUPD Non-Emergency Number.
LUPD contact information: Emergency (434) 592-3911 | Non-Emergency: (434) 592-7641
Did You Know?
Liberty was ranked among the top 3 safest campuses in Virginia and in the top 10% of safest campuses in America for 2023 by Niche.com.
Safety
The LU Police Dept. offers safety training, text alerts, and a fully staffed police force.
Learn the many ways Liberty continues to invest in your campus safety.
Learn more >
Student Care and Counseling
As an LU student, you can have access to professional counseling, group support, and wellness seminars.
Discover how you can be supported, no matter what life brings your way.
Learn more >
Diversity
Inclusion, equality, non-discrimination, and cultural competency are important to all of us.
See how being united by a common faith frees us to celebrate our differences.
Learn more >"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/students/making-a-difference/","What are the issues that matter to you?
Alleviating poverty? Community development? Crisis and disaster relief? Environmental concerns? Human and civil rights? Elder neglect, crisis pregnancy, or other social issues?
At Liberty, you can actively engage these and other social concerns — no matter which degree program you choose.
Because we believe an education isn’t complete if it ignores teaching students how to make things right in the world, or denies giving them the chance to do it themselves.
Liberty students serving communities around the world
Local Outreach
Our students aren’t waiting to act like the Church when they graduate and leave Liberty – they are living as the Church right now.
Learn about the many ways students make a lasting impact on the Lynchburg community by volunteering on a regular basis.
Global Outreach
Liberty is leading the way in training students — from all academic fields — in areas like disaster relief, anti-human trafficking, orphan care, food and water distribution, and poverty alleviation.
Learn about our recent crisis response trips and how you can be involved in bringing tangible help and healing to victims of unexpected disasters.
Leading nonprofit employers like Samaritan’s Purse seek out Liberty students for their academic excellence and their commitment to serving others.
The Value of Volunteering
Employers are not just looking for a great education or a great résumé – they want to hire great people.
Employers are looking for candidates who exhibit adaptability, flexibility, honesty, teamwork, dependability, willingness to listen and learn, critical thinking, and good communication skills.
Employers are looking for candidates who exhibit adaptability, flexibility, honesty, teamwork, dependability, willingness to listen and learn, critical thinking, and good communication skills.
Volunteer opportunities help students cultivate these traits and are an intentional part of the Liberty experience.
Volunteer coordinators regularly report that our students exceed expectations, have better attitudes than adult volunteers, and over-deliver.
Many times, students are volunteering using the technical skills they learn in their degree programs, like sound engineering, technical production, or program development.
Liberty students serve at over 1,500 organizations per year.
They give over half a million hours in volunteer service every year.
One program – Campus Serve – was started in 2002, and about 150 students continue to serve Lynchburg every week through work projects, children’s ministry, elderly care, and poverty alleviation.
Liberty’s humanitarian aid organization, LU Send, has sent teams to provide immediate disaster relief to places like California, Puerto Rico, Texas, Antigua, Cuba, and Mexico. 
What are some ways Liberty students and staff are making changes in the world?
Liberty’s Habitat for Humanity Club has raised money for and built three homes since 2014 — and just received their second $20,000 grant from State Farm Insurance to begin their fourth. The only other school to have received the grant back-to-back was Clemson University.
Law students provide free tax filing help to low-income families every year. 
Medical students provide free physicals, flu shots, mammograms, and mental health and vision screenings during community clinics in underserved areas every year. 
Habit for Humanity Club at Liberty helping build homes for those who need it most
Operation Christmas Child
Every year, Liberty students participate in Operation Christmas Child. Thousands of shoeboxes are distributed in September and are packed and prayed over by the students before being collected in October during the Liberty University Shoebox Blitz.
In Fall 2019, over 2,400 shoeboxes were assembled and donated — one dorm packed nearly 270 boxes in a single evening!
And over the past year…
Liberty University partnered with Unclaimed Baggage and HumanKind in the Fall 2019 semester to distribute 308 suitcases to foster children in Central Virginia. Unclaimed Baggage donated the suitcases, then Liberty students decorated them and purchased hygiene kits, blankets, and toys to pack inside.
Over 100 students packed more than 1,000 backpacks through LU Serve Food Disparity workshop as part of Food for Thought’s backpack program, providing underprivileged Lynchburg City School students with weekend meals.
Sodexo, Liberty’s dining services provider, and the local Food Lion also donated a combined 3,450 pounds of food, filling 490 additional backpacks.
Liberty’s football team used the Thanksgiving season to buy and personally deliver special meals to roughly 12 different families. During the final game of the regular season, they collected 10 bins of canned food for Lynchburg Daily Bread (a local food pantry).
Liberty sent faculty, staff, and students on 24 trips during Spring Break 2019. Projects included preparing housing for incoming refugees in Spain, teaching music to children in Nicaragua, and providing trauma counseling for sex trafficking victims in India.
In both 2018 and 2019, Family and Consumer Sciences students raised more than $4,000 for local organizations and nonprofits through class projects.
Over 6,000 diapers and 80 baby items were collected during Liberty’s Law Students for Life Club 2019 prayer breakfast and donated to the Blue Ridge Pregnancy Center.
“Don’t think that it’s going to get done if you don’t do it. We all have to roll up our sleeves, we all have to be contributing. If not you, then who?”
— David Welch, Executive Director of LU Send
“Serving in Nepal showed me (in a way I could not have received through a textbook) that I don’t have to take small bites of the possible — through Christ, I can embark on the impossible.”
—Amy R.
“There are so many types of devastation, and each of them reveals this is such a broken world. Being exposed to these types of hurt and brokenness is sobering, and it changes the way that you live.
It’s a privilege to be intentional and respond by becoming part of the aid and relief.”
— Holly Griswold, Associate Director of LU Serve Now
“One of the biggest benefits of the trip [to Rwanda] was seeing the faith of others that had endured through crisis. I was speaking to our amazing translator, Justin, who is now a dear friend of mine. He was a young child during the Rwandan genocide and lost all of his family members.
I asked him what he did when he doubted God. He looked at me confused, “What do you mean?” I repeated my question, and he responded: “I never doubted God.” He didn’t say this in a prideful manner, he was just thoroughly confused by the concept of doubting God in the midst of trials because his view of God did not change based on circumstances.
This trip deepened my view of reconciliation and forgiveness to a level I didn’t even know existed.”
— Brooke S., psychology student"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/parents/the-right-fit/","You Want the Best for Your Child
You’ve spent the last 15-17 years pouring into your son or daughter — sending them off to school can be difficult. College is a time where your child will transition to adulthood, and choosing the best place for that transformation to take place can feel overwhelming. We understand.
That’s why, at Liberty, we’re committed to providing you with a smooth, simple-to-navigate college search experience.
We want you to easily find the answers you need to feel informed, comfortable, and ready to make a college decision you’re happy with.
Think Liberty will be a great fit?
Submit Enrollment Deposit 
Lock in the highest possible scholarship amount for your student by submitting a fully refundable $250 Enrollment Deposit today!
How to Learn More
Take a look around the website: Our wide variety of pages, links, videos, and testimonials is designed to give you a comprehensive picture of what Liberty can offer your child — both as a student and as a person. Dig in and get to know us!
Plan a visit: Virtual tours are great (have you taken ours yet?), but there’s nothing like being on campus yourself to feel the Liberty difference. Whether you only have a few hours or want to spend four days on campus, you’ll find several visiting options to choose from. You have to see Liberty’s campus to believe it, so start planning the visit that’s right for you.
Contact us: If coming to campus in person isn’t possible right now, feel free to chat us, email us, or give us a call. Our special parent helpline will connect you with admission counselors who are experienced and looking forward to answering all of your college questions.
Get to Know Liberty University
The Liberty Story
It started with a mountain and a dream. Learn more about how 54 students became over 350,000 in less than 50 years, and how a vision to Train Champions for Christ continues to make the world a better place.
Who We Are
College not only prepares students for a successful life but also introduces them to the people who will have a lifelong impact on them.
Who will influence your son or daughter’s life while they are at Liberty? Get to know some of our students, faculty, staff, and alumni.
What We Believe
As a Christian academic community in the tradition of evangelical institutions of higher education, Liberty continues the philosophy of education which first gave rise to the university.
Learn more about our convictions and how they shape our decisions.
Plan a Visit
TourLU
Want to hit the highlights of LU? Take one of our daily campus tours.
You’ll enjoy a morning or afternoon tour of campus (approximately 4 hours).
This tour gives an overview of campus, including major facilities, dorms, dining options, and much more.
Your student will have the opportunity to apply to Liberty for free.
Tours are available Monday-Saturday at 9 a.m. and 2 p.m. and Sunday at 2 p.m.*
*Daily campus tours are not available on event days. 
ExperienceLU
ExperienceLU is a single-day event that allows you to dig deeper and learn more about the Liberty experience.
Enjoy this all-day event that includes a tour of campus.
Learn about specific programs your child may be interested in.
Try out our award-winning dining hall.
Hear from representatives who will tell you about Liberty’s many student services.
Your student will have the opportunity to apply to Liberty for free.
College for a Weekend (CFAW)
Come spend the weekend on Liberty’s campus. You’ll make lasting memories with your whole family while you get to know Liberty — and Lynchburg, the town you’ll love to visit.
You’ll enjoy three days exploring campus.
You can connect with other parents who are feeling just like you.
Attend parent-focused seminars and courses that will unravel the mysteries of financial aid, the FAFSA, scholarship searches, and more.
Eat in the dining hall, visit the dorms, and enjoy all that Liberty’s campus has to offer.
“We returned home a few hours ago to Eastern N.C. after attending Experience LU on Friday. Since attending, I have to admit that our family can’t stop talking about Liberty University. I’m not just talking about my senior who hopes to attend next year; I am talking about his two brothers and us, his parents.
You don’t know what this means to us as parents. Praise God for what you have done!
Thank you for such a great event and for what you do! Now, to finish the application process and hope we can become part of the Flames community!”
–Bill Pratt, friend of Liberty University
Contact Us
Message and data rates may apply. For additional information, text HELP to 49596. You may opt-out at any time by sending STOP to 49596. Visit for Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/parents/affording-liberty/","We Make a World-Class Education Affordable
Net Price Calculator
A net price is how much you’ll pay for college in a single academic year AFTER scholarship and grant money are subtracted.
Net Price Calculator 
College Cost Breakdown
Knowing up-front what you’re paying for and why can go a long way toward making you feel comfortable about your investment.
College Cost Breakdown 
Forms of Financial Aid
We work hard to find financial solutions that offer your student the best education for the most affordable price.
Financial Aid 
“I chose Liberty University because of its affordability.”
– Zachary Breeden, English and Writing student
95% of Liberty students receive financial aid
5
Years Of Frozen Tuition
We have frozen tuition for the 2023-2024 academic year – the 5th year in a row.
1st
University in America
Liberty is the 1st university in the U.S. — public or private — to design a financial assistance program that funds the difference for students who don’t receive a full federal Pell Grant.*
Middle America Scholarship
No matter where you’re from, our Middle America Scholarship provides need-based aid for families who typically earn $35,000-$95,000 per year. Your student could qualify for up to $20,000 over four years.
Are There Any Perks to Being In-State?
If you live in Virginia, you already know everything the Commonwealth has to offer — from mountains, beaches, and historical monuments to big cities, small towns, sophistication, and down-home hospitality. It has a little bit of everything. It’s home.
And if Liberty becomes your college home, you may qualify for at least $1,500 per year just for being a Virginia resident.
Did You Know? 
Parents who attend Liberty University Online may be eligible to receive a 10% tuition discount for their child to enroll with Liberty University Online Academy.*
Remember — anytime you’d like a personal consultation on the potential cost of attending Liberty University, you can call our Parent Helpline at (855) 745-3568 or text 49596.
Message and data rates may apply. For additional information, text HELP to 49596. You may opt out at any time by sending STOP to 49596. Visit for Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy
Think Liberty will be a great fit?
Submit Enrollment Deposit
Lock in the highest possible scholarship amount for your student by submitting a refundable Enrollment Deposit today!
*Discount only applicable to tuition for non-dual enrollment courses with Liberty University Online Academy (LUOA). Students must be new to LUOA and enrolled in full-time courses to be eligible. At least one parent must have completed a course with Liberty University Online (LUO) within the last 24 months to be eligible. This LUO Parent Discount is not stackable with other discounts. Contact LUOA for further details and to see if your family is eligible."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/parents/preparing-for-the-future/","At Liberty, we strive to do everything we can to help your child prepare for a successful future – from the moment they enroll through graduation.
As a Liberty student, your child will have access to unparalleled academic training designed to give them the personal and professional skills they need to walk into any workplace and make it better.
How does Liberty do this differently from other schools?
By recognizing that a Christian mission at the forefront of education is invaluable for developing character.
And by giving students the top-notch equipment, faculty, and opportunities they need to thrive in whatever career field they choose.
When students gain a firm understanding of the coursework — and the responsibility, honest work ethic, and all-around attitude of service to others that Christianity teaches — they stand out to employers.
See why employers like C-SPAN, Hobby Lobby, and the Virginia State Police seek to hire Liberty graduates!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/parents/living-at-liberty/","College is not only a time of academic growth — it’s also a time of rich personal growth.
Throughout their college experience, your son or daughter will build meaningful relationships, develop lifelong habits, and determine not just a career path, but a life path.
Who will they be at the end of it?
At Liberty, we probably won’t serve your home-cooked favorites. And we know a dorm room isn’t like a bedroom at home. But we will care for your child. We will pray for and encourage them, empower them to make healthy choices, and walk beside them through difficult times.
Every aspect of life on Liberty’s campus has been intentionally designed to cultivate a healthy, vibrant Christian community where students thrive — academically, personally, and spiritually.
After all, it’s where we Train Champions for Christ.
Get to know the many facilities on Liberty’s campus.
Think Liberty will be a great fit?
Submit Enrollment Deposit 
Lock in the highest possible scholarship amount for your student by submitting a refundable Enrollment Deposit today!
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Housing
No matter where your student lives on campus, they’ll find a community to grow with, an environment to thrive in, and a place they can call home. Learn more about Liberty’s six main residence halls and everything they offer.
Learn more >
Dining
With over 24 dining options on campus — including Thai, Mediterranean, woodfire-grilled pizza, gluten- and allergy-free meals, and more — your child will never go hungry. And if they have special dining needs, we’ve got that covered, too.
Learn more >
Campus Map
Liberty’s campus stretches over 7,000 acres. Get a bird’s eye view of everything on campus.
Learn more >
Lynchburg
Food trucks, farmers’ markets, mountain vistas, and more. Learn how the warmth and charm of Lynchburg, “The Gem on the James,” will make it the town you’ll love to visit.
Learn more >
Health and Wellness
At Liberty, we understand the importance of physical and mental wellness for college students. Find out about Liberty’s many ways to get — and stay — healthy.
Learn more >"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/parents/admissions/","Understanding the Process
There are a lot of complicated processes in life — the college admission process shouldn’t be one of them. Neither should the financial aid process.
So, great news! Once your child applies to Liberty, they’ll receive an individualized Student Checklist that will guide them from admission to graduation, walking them through every form, process, and step along the way. 
Want more details? Take a high-level look at everything involved in becoming an LU student.
Think Liberty will be a great fit?
Submit Enrollment Deposit 
Lock in the highest possible scholarship amount for your student by submitting a refundable Enrollment Deposit today!
Application FAQs
Who can apply to Liberty University?
	
Second-semester sophomores, juniors, and seniors
Transfer students
	
What are the admission requirements?
	See our Admission Requirements for more information.	
How can my child apply?
	
Online: Online Application
Through Live Chat
Over the phone with an admission counselor: Call (800) 543-5317, Mon., Tues., Thurs., Fri. 10 a.m.-9 p.m., Wed. 9 a.m.-6 p.m., and Sat. 10 a.m.-6 p.m. (EST).
Have questions? Call the parent helpline at: (855) 745-3568
	
Is there an application fee?
	
Yes. The standard application fee is $50 (deferred until Financial Check-In)
If your son or daughter applies while they are on campus for a daily visit, ExperienceLU, or during College For A Weekend (CFAW), the fee will be waived.
	
What other steps need to be taken before my child can be accepted?
	
Write and send in a personal essay
Request their high school transcripts
Submit their Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
	
Why is it important for my son or daughter to claim their Liberty account before they’re even accepted?
	
Every applicant’s Liberty account gives them access to their individualized Student Checklist, which will walk them through getting accepted, registered, and ready for their first semester as a freshman or transfer student.
It will also be the main form of communication between your student and the university. They’ll receive emails about scholarship opportunities, deadlines, and other important information, so they should check their inbox regularly.
	
Why is it important to submit the Enrollment Deposit?
	
Submitting the Enrollment Deposit early in the admission process will guarantee your son or daughter more financial aid awards.
When they place the deposit, they will also earn a free CFAW visit – a $50 savings!
	
Acceptance FAQs
Once your child has been accepted, get excited! You’re going to be a Liberty parent!
How do we start the financial aid process?
Submit your FAFSA
Apply for loans and grants
Complete Financial Check-In (FCI)
(Remember that the Student Checklist will help you with all of these processes.)
How does my student get ready for their first semester?
Complete their Math and English Assessments (these will place your child in the right classes)
Register for courses
Buy textbooks
Create a FERPA pin
Get their Flames Pass
Complete their health form
School Codes
SAT (Liberty Code: 5385) 
ACT (Liberty Code: 4364)
FAFSA (Liberty code: 010392)
Important Terms to Know
ASIST
	
Read More
	
Enrollment Deposit
	
Most schools to require some sort of deposit during the enrollment process — that’s normal. Some use it as a firm RSVP, others apply it toward housing or something similar.
At Liberty, the Enrollment Deposit gives you access to additional scholarship funds — possibly up to $10,000 worth! And the earlier you submit it, the more benefits you have available.
What kinds of benefits?
The opportunity to live like a college student for four days on Liberty’s campus in Lynchburg, Va., at College For A Weekend (CFAW). Come as a family – your student will attend classes, stay in a dorm, eat in our award-winning dining hall, and hear from a leading influencer in entertainment, business, government, or ministry — for free! (saving you $50)
A free application! When you call and speak to an admissions counselor, your student can apply and submit their Enrollment Deposit at the same time — and the app fee will be on us (saving you another $50).
And a $2,000 Early Deposit Award applied to your child’s first year at Liberty.
Read More
	
FERPA PIN (Personal Identification Number)
	
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) is a Federal law that protects the privacy of student education records.
The private information in your student’s account — such as grades, class schedules, and financial aid awards — may not be released to anyone without their consent (if they are 18 years old or above). Creating a PIN for their FERPA account allows them to give you access to this information.
Read More
	
FAFSA (Free Application for Federal Student Aid)
	
In order to be considered for federal grants, work study, loans, or Liberty University scholarships, you must submit a Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA).
Read More
	
Financial Check-In (FCI)
	
FCI is how you process your payment for each semester. When you complete it, you will:
Confirm your student’s course schedule
Secure their housing
Choose their dining option
The earlier you complete FCI, the more payment plan options are available.
Read More
	
Flames Pass
	
The Flames pass is your student’s official student ID card. They’ll use it…
As a key to get into their dorm
To pay for meals
To do laundry
To check out library books
As a bus pass
To get into campus activities and athletic events
Read More"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/bachelors/exercise-science/","Be a Champion of Health with a Degree in Exercise Science
Are you passionate about health and wellness or fitness and exercise? Do you want to help others achieve their goals and live out their healthiest lives? We do too! That’s why we’ve created our exercise science degree programs to help you pursue your passions in an exciting and fulfilling career.
Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Exercise Science is CAAHEP accredited.
Check out how our exercise science students are doing:
For the ACSM EP-C exam — 25% higher than the national pass rate!
Focus your studies on the area that best matches your professional goals
Transfer in up to 75% of your total credits!
Our exercise science program offers 3 specializations: fitness specialist, strength and conditioning specialist, and therapeutic science. With the first two specialist concentrations, you will learn how to help athletes reach their peak physical fitness by working as a fitness professional or strength and conditioning coach.
Our therapeutic science specialization provides a strong foundation for pursuing future graduate-level health science careers such as athletic training, chiropractic, dietician, physical therapy, occupational therapy, or even someone who works with prosthetics!
So what are you waiting for? Start following your passions today to lead a life that promotes the wellness and health of others.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Exercise Science Program?
By pursuing one of our exercise science degrees, you can have confidence that your program is both highly esteemed and challenging. You’ll learn from exercise science professionals, get hands-on experience, and work with some of the latest technology in the field.
Our exercise science program is nationally accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP). This ensures that our program meets rigorous standards to provide you with a high-quality education.
We are also excited about one of our greatest assets at Liberty—our professors. These professors have many years of experience in a wide range of exercise science-related fields. In addition to teaching courses full time, many professors also continue to work part-time in their discipline to incorporate real-world and practical experiences in the classroom. They are here to mentor, guide, and support you throughout your academic journey to help you achieve your goals.
Additionally, we want to make sure that while you’re here, you get hands-on experience. With our laboratory and internship courses, you are guaranteed to gain practical experience in your field by the time you graduate. In our laboratory classes which are held in our Human Performance Lab, Biomechanics & Motion Analysis Lab, Functional Assessment Labs, Athletic Training Teaching Lab, and Standardized Patient Assessment Labs, you will use state-of-the-art technology in sport and exercise science.
What Are the Benefits of Pursuing a Bachelor of Science in Exercise Science?
Our exercise science program is nationally accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP).
Our professors have years of experience in a wide range of health and fitness fields.
You are guaranteed hands-on experience with laboratory and internship opportunities.
Our Human Performance Lab, Biomechanics & Motion Analysis Lab, Functional Assessment Labs, Athletic Training Teaching Lab, and Standardized Patient Assessment Labs will ensure you are on the cutting edge of technology in your field.
Our students exceed the national pass rate on the American College of Sports Medicine Clinical Exercise Physiologist Certification (ACSM EP-C) exam and the National Strength and Conditioning Association Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialist (NSCA CSCS) exam."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/parents/on-campus-fun/","College isn’t just about earning a degree – it’s about making great friends and great memories.
At Liberty, we understand the value of work — and the value of relaxing. God instituted rest for a reason, and your student can be their best in the classroom when they’ve taken time to recharge outside of it. 
Here, your son or daughter will find countless opportunities to play, talk, laugh, inspire, entertain, and grow with like-minded students from a variety of backgrounds — all in environments designed to build community. Feel the Liberty difference for yourself — as a family."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/","Dream Big with Liberty’s School of Music
Imagine performing surrounded by fellow Christians worshiping together. Picture yourself leading your church in compelling, powerful worship. Envision your future classroom as you instruct the next generation of eager musicians. Any of these exciting careers are just a degree away with Liberty’s School of Music!
At Liberty, our mission is to equip and train musicians to be Champions for Christ. In addition to our firm foundation in the Christian faith, our School of Music provides its students with countless opportunities to develop and display their musical abilities. For example, our LU Praise team performed at the ACDA National Convention and Inaugural Prayer Service for the president! 
We offer 12 unique Bachelor of Music (B.M.) degrees. Choose from programs like worship leadership, music education, and even commercial music. We also provide Bachelor of Science and Bachelor of Arts degrees so that you can tailor your college experience to your individual career goals.
Check out all of the degree options we have below in the School of Music and find the one that fits your needs best!
Licensure requirements may vary by state. Please research your state’s licensure or reciprocity requirements here: https://www.liberty.edu/statelicensure/.
School of Music Bachelor’s Degree Programs
Commercial Music (B.M.)
Commercial Music (B.S.)
Guitar Performance (B.M.)
Music and Worship (B.S.)
Music Education: Choral (B.M.)
Music Education: Instrumental (B.M.)
Music Instrumental (B.S.)
Music in World Cultures (B.M.)
Music in World Cultures (B.S.)
Music Vocal (B.S.)
Piano Performance (B.M.)
String Performance (B.M.)
Vocal Performance (B.M.)
Woodwind, Brass, or Percussion Performance (B.M.)
Worship Leadership (B.M.)
Why Choose a Bachelor’s Degree from Liberty’s School of Music?
Earn your music degree from Liberty and receive more than a diploma! Your courses will be full of hands-on learning, internship opportunities, and professional development. You deserve to study under industry leaders in music and worship, developing your talent with nothing but the best equipment and facilities.
As a School of Music student, you will have various resources at your disposal, including the following:
Over forty full-time faculty with degrees from many of the most prestigious music schools in the nation.
Liberty Music Group (LMG): Liberty’s professional music publishing and recording company, providing students and staff opportunities to publish their work. Commercial music students will especially benefit from this resource!
Our 141,000-square-foot Center for Music and the Worship Arts building, which includes a large concert hall, state of the art lighting and audio technology, various recital halls, two Mac Labs, and a recording studio.
Additionally, Liberty is a designated “All-Steinway” school and has been rated #1 Christian music school by Christian Universities Online! As one of the largest schools of music in the nation, Liberty is accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM) and our students participate in numerous state and regional competitions, with many walking away champions.
We want you to experience the very best of the music industry. Let us come alongside you, providing exceptional faculty and resources to equip you with the bachelor’s degree you need to succeed!
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
School of Music Bachelor’s Degree Information
Residential 
120-142 total credit hours
Transfer in up to 75% of your total degree
Check out our course catalog.
Admission Requirements for Undergraduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received.
Read More"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/psychology/","Start Your Journey as a Professional Helper with Our Bachelor’s Degree in Psychology
Have you always had the desire to be in a profession where you get to help others? Helping others is not only a gift to those around you, but it is also personally fulfilling. By pursuing our Bachelor of Science in Psychology, you’re going to get the foundational knowledge and skills you need to start pursuing a career in the helping professions.
The great thing about pursuing a degree in psychology is all of the options that will be available to you upon graduation.
If you’re interested in becoming a professional counselor or psychologist, your next step after a bachelor’s degree is graduate school, and our program will prepare you. However, you may choose to pursue a career in human services or case management upon graduation, and you’ll be equipped for that, too!
So what are you waiting for? Our world needs people like you who are excited about helping others and desire to make a positive impact. If you choose to pursue our psychology degree, we are going to help you accomplish these goals.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Psychology Bachelor’s Degree?
At Liberty, we desire to give you the best we have to offer. That means you’re learning from professionals, taking rewarding courses, and getting the experience you need to succeed in your field. We’re going to make sure you’re well-prepared for your career or graduate school by the time you finish your degree.
Wondering what’s so great about our professors? These men and women are professionals in their field. Each of them has degrees in psychology or counseling with experience in their field—including in professional practice. Not only that, but they teach from a Christian perspective and pour into the academic and spiritual lives of their students.
Another exciting aspect of our psychology degree is the opportunities for real-world experience and social networking. You have the opportunity to participate in research projects with professors and the potential for publication as an undergraduate student. There are also internship opportunities available to you. Plus, you can attend any of our psychology activities and network with peers and faculty by joining Club Psych.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s Degree in Psychology?
In our psychology degree, we have curated a curriculum that is rewarding, flexible, and that equips you for the next step towards your intended career or in your academic journey. Throughout this degree, you’ll take multiple general education and psychology courses, as well as have the opportunity to add diverse electives or a minor.
As you study, some of the courses you take will cover topics like research, social psychology, personality, statistics, physiological psychology, and psychological measurement. Each of these courses will help prepare you to enter the career field you choose or apply to a graduate program that requires a psychology foundation.
You have the opportunity to choose multiple electives to get a sampling of different courses you’re interested in, or you could choose one of our many minors like global studies, business, or technical studies to give yourself additional marketable skills and bolster your resume.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
PSYC 312 – Social Psychology
PSYC 341 – Psychology of Personality
PSYC 365 – Psychological Foundations of Learning
PSYC 420 – Psychology and Christianity
Industrial Organizational Psychology"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/degrees/bachelors/","Get Your Career Started by Earning a Bachelor’s Degree!
Are you excited about furthering your education and starting your professional journey? By earning a bachelor’s degree, you’ll become more marketable to future employers and equipped to pursue a graduate degree, should you choose to do so. Maybe you’re interested in becoming a doctor, veterinarian, or nurse. Perhaps you want to be a professional artist, mathematician, educator, or engineer. We can offer you degrees in all of these fields and many more. You’ll find the degree and specialization that helps you get where you want to go.
At Liberty, we want your bachelor’s degree to fit your interests and help you meet your goals. That’s why we’re an accredited university with over 200 residential degrees available.
So what are you waiting for? Take the first step towards your career by pursuing your bachelor’s degree. We’ll provide the training and knowledge you need to be successful in whatever field you’re passionate about.
Available Degree Programs by School
College of Arts and Sciences
Helms School of Government
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity
School of Aeronautics
School of Behavioral Sciences
School of Business
School of Communication and the Arts
School of Education
School of Engineering
School of Health Sciences
School of Music
School of Nursing 
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Undergraduate Minors
Personalize your degree further by adding a minor. Liberty’s options range from aeronautics to the health sciences to fine arts and more! Check out all of our undergraduate minors today."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/social-work/","Become an Advocate for Those Who Need it Most with Liberty’s Social Work Degree
Prepare yourself for a career that really makes a difference! Earning a bachelor’s degree in social work can give you the skill set you need to become an advocate for people from all walks of life. Liberty’s social work degree will equip you with compassion and care for these people so you can become an industry leader with excellence and integrity.
From adoption services to mental health clinics to social service agencies, the field of social work continues to grow and change. We want you to be prepared for your future, whether you are looking to work in a medical capacity or on mission. There are so many ways to use the talents God has given you, so let us help! Get ready for a diverse and rewarding career in social work with a degree from Liberty University.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Social Work (BSW)?
Pursue Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Social Work (BSW) and set yourself up for success. If you are looking to work for any sort of social service agency, a social work degree will help you stand out. These agencies prefer to hire candidates that have this specific degree under their belt.
Having a social work degree opens the door to multiple job opportunities, from careers in adoption services to medical or even military social work. Liberty’s bachelor’s degree program prepares you with best practices vital to a thriving career in these fields.
By earning a BSW accredited by the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE), you can gain advanced standing for a master’s in social work (MSW)! This means that while you are taking your necessary undergraduate courses, you can earn up to one full year of academic credit towards an MSW program. Earn your bachelor’s and get ahead in your graduate studies all in one degree!
What Will You Learn in Our Social Work Program?
Develop the skills you need to succeed wherever your career in social work takes you. Our program focuses on equipping you with care and compassion as you learn best practices you will use on a daily basis. We want you to feel as prepared as possible to provide the best social, mental, and spiritual help you can to those who need it most.
Our social work degree provides courses in health, psychology, sociology, and, of course, social work. Our psychology courses will develop your understanding of human behavior. The sociology courses will help you assess and prevent certain social problems you or your clients may face in the workplace. Finally, your social work courses will give you practical applications on how to work with families, diverse populations, chemical dependents, and more! 
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying.
Featured Courses
PSYC 101 – General Psychology
SOWK 260 – Chemical Dependency
SOWK 325 – Social Welfare and Policy
Highlights of Our Social Work Degree
We want to see you succeed! That’s why we offer various ways for you to take your classroom knowledge and apply it in your future career field. Through our social work degree, you have the ability to gain hands-on experiences in social work through:
The Department of Psychology offers activities and events that can deepen your awareness of social injustices and learn from industry leaders on how to go about making a difference.
Joining one of our clubs and student organizations, such as the Social Work Club, where you can network with peers and professors alike.
Field experience opportunities and internships that allow you to gain invaluable work experience. Choose to do so near Lynchburg, at home, through our Washington Fellowship program, or even internationally!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/aeronautics/associate/aviation-maintenance-technician/","Become a Certified Aircraft Mechanic with Liberty’s Associate Degree in Aviation Maintenance
Your college degree should equip you for not just the career you dream of, but also the specific job you desire. If that means becoming a certified aircraft mechanic, let us help! Liberty’s aviation maintenance technician associate degree will help prepare you for the specific technical position you want within the vast field of aviation.
Not only is aviation a large field, but it’s also a growing one! Within the next 20 years, there will be a worldwide need for over 640,000 new aircraft mechanics. This is a huge gap to fill, and as a nonprofit, Christian university, we want to train the next generation of men and women as Champions for Christ ready to fill the need with integrity and vision.
It’s your time to make a difference. Partner your excitement for aircraft maintenance with our mission to bring Christ into all areas of the workplace. Fulfill the calling God has placed on your life. Earn a degree that takes your goals to the next level with Liberty.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Aviation Maintenance Technician Degree?
Pursue an associate degree that equips you for more. Liberty’s aviation maintenance technician program is designed to prepare you for Airframe and Powerplant (A&P) certification, a vital license required by most employers. Additionally, your general education courses provide you with opportunities for future career advancement if you plan to obtain your bachelor’s degree.
Liberty offers a bachelor’s degree in aviation maintenance that flows seamlessly from this particular associate degree. With these transfer credits, you would only need to complete around 30 credits to walk away with a bachelor’s degree, which is a great way to stand out among your peers and transition into higher, managerial positions.
Earn a degree that pushes you further. Gain the certification you need to work in your field right away while creating opportunities for further career development when you’re ready for it!
Credit for Life and Work Experience
Another great plus at Liberty is the ability to take your experience and have it count towards class credits. You’ve worked hard, and we offer numerous opportunities for you to gain credit hours for the experience or licenses you have.
Already Have Your Mechanic’s License? (Aviation Experience Plus) 
What Will You Learn in Our Aviation Maintenance Technician Associate Degree?
Our Associate of Arts in Aviation Maintenance Technician degree is designed to equip you with the skills and Airframe and Powerplant (A&P) license you’ll need to land a job in the growing aviation industry.
As an aviation associate degree student, you will advance in your understanding of how to use mathematics and physics in your maintenance work. Our courses focus on a variety of systems you will need to be familiar with, including aircraft electrical, airframe auxiliary, hydraulic and pneumatic, engine electrical, and propeller systems.
Learn all you’ll need to confidently pursue a career in aviation maintenance by studying at Liberty. We will provide you with hands-on experience checking and troubleshooting systems as well as making sure you are aware of proper operational and construction components vital to aircraft safety.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
AVMT 202 – Aircraft Electrical Systems
AVMT 208 – Airframe Assembly and Inspection
AVMT 209 – Landing Gear Systems
AVMT 221 – Propeller Systems
Highlights of Our Aviation Maintenance Technician Degree
Within 15 years, Liberty’s aviation programs have grown from just 4 to over 400 residential students, not to mention our additional online student population. No matter how far we have come, we will never stop pushing our programs to be the best they can be for students like you.
Some of the major benefits of being a Liberty student in the aviation maintenance technician associate degree program include:
Obtaining an Aviation Maintenance Certification: A&P (Airframe & Powerplant) license, a credential employers look for in their mechanics
Professors who know their students by name, providing prayer and support to each one
Top-line internships at major airlines and aviation companies, with opportunities to travel around the world
The School of Aeronautics’ state-of-the-art flight simulators for enhanced learning
The opportunity to investigate real-world aviation issues by utilizing our research lab"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/divinity/bachelors/","Prepare to Change the World with a Bachelor’s in Divinity
You want to change lives by bringing the gospel to hurting people in need of the Savior. We do too. And when you earn a bachelor’s degree from our John W. Rawlings School of Divinity, you will develop the skills needed to follow God’s calling on your life, wherever it takes you. We have bachelor’s degrees to help you serve in the church, parachurch ministries, youth leadership, pastoral ministry, humanitarian work, camp coordinating, and more.
When you earn your degree from Liberty, you’ll learn from professors who have real-world leadership and ministry experience within the church while gaining your own experience through the variety of internship opportunities available to you as a student. Through hands-on learning activities and the ability to serve in a local church, you will earn a degree that gives you both the knowledge and practical skills you need to pursue a life in ministry.

Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Our John W. Rawlings School of Divinity Bachelor Degree Programs
Camp and Outdoor Adventure Leadership (B.S.)
Christian Leadership and Church Ministries (B.S.)
Pastoral Leadership (B.S.)
Religious Studies – Bible and Theology (B.A. and B.S.)
Theology and Apologetics (B.A.)
Why Choose a John W. Rawlings School of Divinity Bachelor’s Degree?
Liberty University is a Christian liberal arts school where you will gain fundamental knowledge in a variety of subjects while you study biblical wisdom and knowledge. You will also have the opportunity to study history, literature, film, music, and art from a biblical perspective, helping you better understand and engage in current cultural discussions. When you earn your bachelor’s degree at Liberty, you will receive the practical ministry training of a bible college while also having access to the opportunities available at an ever-growing liberal arts institution. 
Wondering where you will attend classes on campus? The John W. Rawlings School of Divinity is housed in the Freedom Tower, our most unique building located in the heart of campus. Our Freedom Tower integrates cutting-edge technology into the classroom, creating an innovative learning environment tailored to the needs of our divinity students. While here, you can utilize our 7-projector classroom, teleconferencing capabilities, and homiletics lab as you study God’s Word in pursuit of ministry.
As you earn your degree in divinity, take advantage of the resources Liberty and the John W. Rawlings School of Divinity have to offer you. We are a teaching university, meaning your professors will invest time into your education through both mentorship and innovative instruction. Additionally, you will have endless opportunities to gain real-life experience as you pursue internships with churches, parachurches, and nonprofit organizations.
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity Degree Information
Residential
120 hours
Transfer in up to 75% of your total degree
Review our course catalog for more information on the John W. School of Divinity
Admission Requirements for Undergraduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/government/associate/criminal-justice/","Be a Formidable Asset for Justice with an Associate of Arts in Criminal Justice 
A career in criminal justice is one that can be rewarding mentally, spiritually, and financially. Whether you want to protect your local community through patrol or help behind the scenes managing resources and people, a degree in criminal justice will help you attain your goals. 
You’ll receive the training you need in just two years by pursuing an Associate of Arts in Criminal Justice. With this degree, you will gain an understanding of criminal law as well as the nature of crime and how it relates to a biblical worldview. You will be prepared for many specialized career opportunities including criminal investigator, detective, and corrections officer.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Associate of Arts in Criminal Justice Degree?
An associate degree in criminal justice can provide the credentials you need to begin a career serving your community with pride. This degree program is well-rounded and allows for the possibility of transferring earned credits toward a bachelor program. Our professors are experienced law enforcement and criminal justice professionals who have years of training under their belts working for the FBI, Virginia Beach Police Department, and many other agencies. Throughout your academic journey, you will receive support, guidance, and first-hand knowledge from your professors and classmates.
In the field of criminal justice, more and more positions will not consider you if you do not have a degree. We will train you and ensure that you have the specialized skills and knowledge needed to be successful in the criminal justice field.
What Will You Learn in Our Associate of Arts in Criminal Justice Degree?
As you begin your A.A. in Criminal Justice degree, you will take general education classes like math, English, social science, or history. The real fun begins with your specialized classes in criminal justice. Throughout these classes, you will familiarize yourself with corrections in the United States, criminal law, and the judicial process. You will gain the knowledge and skills needed to carry out investigations and be an asset to any law enforcement or investigatory agency.
Review the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
CJUS 330 – Judicial Process
Highlights of Our Criminal Justice Associate Degree
In our A.A. in Criminal Justice program, you will be taught by professors recognized for their excellence in teaching and who have served with the FBI, the Virginia Beach Police Department, and other distinguished law enforcement agencies.
We care about you as an individual and are dedicated to giving you the support and mentorship you need throughout your A.A. in Criminal Justice degree.
Our program is rooted in the practical application of the theories you learn through simulations within the classroom and internships in the field.
We were awarded an Illuminate Grant for Justice Project DNA testing equipment and training, allowing students under the supervision of professors from our Criminal Justice, School of Law, and Biology departments to research cold cases and assist criminal justice reform advocates in exonerating wrongly convicted individuals."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/government/associate/government/","Be a Positive Influence in Government with an Associate of Arts in Government 
If you are looking to enter a career in government and need credentials on your resume as soon as possible, then an Associate of Arts in Government from Liberty University is the right choice for you. Our A.A. degree provides training in the issues and institutions of American politics and the differences between liberalism and conservatism.
Gain an understanding of the benefits of a Christian worldview in public policy as well as the role of our civil government versus the role of the free market economy. You will study government policies and processes while learning general education requirements. This degree is a great step towards continuing your education if you wish to later transfer your courses to one of Liberty University’s bachelor’s degree programs.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Associate of Arts in Government Degree?
Liberty University’s Associate of Arts in Government is a degree program that can provide fast and affordable credentials for you to begin a career in government. The degree is well-rounded enough that if you want to transfer later to one of our bachelor’s programs, you would be well set up to do so. If you pursue this degree full-time, you can complete it in just 2 years, or 5 semesters.
The reasons people get an associate degree vary, but statistics do not lie. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), people who hold associate degrees earned more in 2020 than non-degree holders.* You have the potential of earning more money and finding the career you are passionate about pursuing further when you have an associate degree. If you are already in a job and ready to pursue a promotion or new challenge, then pursuing this degree is just the opportunity you need to learn new skills and gain a fresh perspective on your future.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Unemployment rates and earnings by educational attainment (viewed online Dec. 2, 2021). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Associate of Arts in Government Degree?
The core curriculum of this degree program consists of general education classes like math, English, and some social science or history classes. The major-specific courses will teach you how to evaluate the nature and role of government from a biblical worldview.
Throughout this degree, you will gain a basic knowledge of our government system and the role of a limited government in relation to the free market economy. You will also examine the American political system and the ongoing struggle between liberalism and conservatism. Additionally, you will hone your communication skills by focusing on your ability to write clearly and concisely.
Download and review our A.A. in Government Degree Completion Plan.
Featured Courses
GOVT 200 – Constitutional Government and Free Enterprise
GOVT 220 – American Government
GOVT 350 – Political Economy and Public Policy
Highlights of Our Government Associate Degree
Get your Associate of Arts degree in government in just 2 years.
Learn to think critically and be guided by duty, honor, and morality.
Our Helms School of Government, named after Sen. Jesse Helms, was founded to promote traditional values and conservative thoughts."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/arts-and-sciences/associate/interdisciplinary-studies/","Make Your Own Unique Degree with an Associate in Interdisciplinary Studies
You are a unique individual with passions and interests that might make it more difficult to choose a traditional degree in one specific area of study. With an Associate of Arts in Interdisciplinary Studies, you can create a degree that suits your career goals and personal interests. Tailor your program the way you want it by choosing from a variety of electives so that you get the most out of your educational journey.
With today’s globalized workforce, you sometimes need to study more than one discipline to gain the experience and credentials you need to stand out. Through an A.A. in Interdisciplinary Studies, you can learn how to effectively communicate your ideas and utilize your specialized training in order to thrive in the fast-paced and rapidly changing work environments you will encounter. Your training will be invaluable as you venture out in a career that requires diverse skill sets.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Associate Degree in Interdisciplinary Studies?
One of the best things about our interdisciplinary studies associate degree is that you can maximize your transfer credit from other schools, military training, and any experience or on-the-job training you might have. This can help speed up your degree completion and enable you to save both time and money. While some universities call this type of program a general studies degree, to better represent the variety of courses integrated into this program Liberty calls it an interdisciplinary studies degree.
Besides the great opportunities you will have by pursuing a degree in interdisciplinary studies, there are so many other reasons to study at our beautiful campus in Lynchburg. You will make friendships that will last a lifetime as you meet students from over 50 states and 70 different countries. You can enjoy activities together with over 200 student-led clubs and recreation centers like Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre, the LaHaye Ice Center, and Hydaway Outdoor Recreation Center.
What Will You Learn in Our Associate of Arts in Interdisciplinary Studies?
What you learn can vary greatly in this program based on what your goals and passions are. This degree is designed to increase your job marketability by increasing your foundational knowledge in a variety of areas. Some of the basic skills you obtain through this degree, no matter what disciplines you decide to study, are career planning, professional development, communication skills, and improving your writing and public speaking ability.
Highlights of our Interdisciplinary Studies Associate Degree Program
Choose courses from Liberty’s different colleges and departments to create a degree that can help you meet your career goals.
Utilize a maximum amount of transfer credit so you can earn your degree faster!
You can complete our multidisciplinary studies associate degree in 2 years."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/arts-and-sciences/associate/history/","Prepare for a Bright Future by Studying the Past with an Associate of Arts in History
Are you interested in studying the great historical leaders, events, and literature of the past? Earning an associate degree in history is a great way to start your educational journey towards a career in a history-related field. Throughout this degree, you will gain skills in professional-level writing, research, and critical thinking.
You will study American and world history, civic and global engagement, and have opportunities to interpret historical documents. If you wish to pursue a four-year bachelor’s degree in the future, then this associate degree program will be the perfect beginning to transition to a higher degree.
Liberty’s mission is to Train Champions for Christ who go into all career fields as representatives of their faith. In considering our historical past taught through a biblical worldview, we can construct the type of future we want with clarity and understanding. Consider pursuing our associate degree in history, and see your future career in a history-related field become a reality.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Our A.A. in History? 
Our Associate of Arts in History emphasizes the understanding of past events and how they affect the present and future. You will engage in critical thinking, written analysis, research, and interpretation studies throughout this degree program. These skills will help you in your career pursuits.
Our campus is perfectly situated in the heart of Virginia, with dozens of historical sites within a four-hour radius. Lynchburg itself is rich in history with historical sites like Thomas Jefferson’s Poplar Forest just a 10-minute drive from campus.
As you study American history, you can visit places like Jamestown, Williamsburg, Yorktown, and Washington D.C. Check out Gettysburg, Winchester, Richmond, and Appomattox when you learn about the Civil War. If you are interested in a hands-on learning experience, drive 15 minutes from campus to Mead’s Tavern — which was built in 1763 and is now owned by Liberty — where you can study archeology, architecture, and history of the era in which the house was built.
Your experienced professors will challenge you and show you how to integrate your Christian faith with the vocational skills that will prepare you for your future. Our Career Center is part of the effort made at Liberty to help you prepare for job searches, mock interviews, and so much more. Should you wish to expand your education, you can easily transfer credits earned in your associate degree to our bachelor’s program.
What Will You Learn in Our Associate Degree in History? 
Our history classes not only provide training in American and world history, but they also equip you with the soft skills you need to be successful in any career field you choose. You can learn how to communicate effectively, write research papers, develop a strong work ethic, and lead with biblical principles. 
Throughout this degree, you will dig deep into fascinating historical periods, western civilization, and how Christianity has helped shape the world we live in today. You’ll learn how to identify modern perspectives and appreciate historical events with informed insight. The wisdom you gain from looking at the past can be a great asset in various careers.
Our experienced professors will help cultivate your love of history and integrate your faith into all aspects of your degree. You can graduate with confidence in your abilities and the impact you will have on those around you.
Featured Courses
HIST 300 – Historical Methodology
HIEU 202 – History of Western Civilization II
HIUS 221 – Survey of American History I 
GEOG 200 – Introduction to Geography
Highlights of Our Associate of Arts in History Degree Program
Mead’s Tavern serves as an onsite laboratory for hands-on training in history, archeology, and more! 
Connect with Career Services for help in job searches, mock interviews, etc.
Our program has been the winner of the Phi Alpha Theta chapter of the year twice in the past eight years.
Three history majors have won the Provost Award for Excellence in Research in 2018.
This degree provides great preparation to transfer into a bachelor’s degree program at Liberty University."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/arts-and-sciences/associate/stem-mathematics/","Gain Critical Knowledge and Analytical Expertise with an Associate Degree in Mathematics
Have you ever thought about measuring the spread of forest fires or oil spills? Do you think about ways to optimize systems or how to measure instantaneous rates of change? By studying mathematics and its applications, you can prepare to do this and much more! Equip yourself with the tools you need to pursue a position in insurance, operations research, finance, or engineering. A great way to get started on the right track is to pursue an associate degree in the field of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM).
Our Associate of Science in STEM Mathematics degree presents basic concepts and methods in modern mathematics to develop your ability to think critically and apply advanced concepts to various disciplines. A degree in mathematics helps show employers that you have the commitment, intelligence, and problem-solving skills necessary for a wide variety of career paths.
With the flexibility that our AS in STEM Mathematics offers, you can prepare for a dynamic future. Research opportunities are encouraged, and professors are willing to sit down with you and discuss research ideas or even help walk through math problems with you. What separates Liberty from the other schools is the way our professors truly believe in our mission of Training Champions for Christ.
Our AS in STEM Mathematics is designed to help you later pursue your BS in Mathematics or math and applied statistics degree. If you are more geared towards engineering or another discipline, you could potentially transfer your credits into another degree as well! Whichever path you choose, you can be confident that you are receiving a world-class STEM education.
Why Choose Liberty’s Associate Degree in STEM Mathematics?
If you choose to pursue your associate degree in STEM with a focus in mathematics, you will receive advanced mathematical training that many people have never experienced. Our STEM courses cover how to analyze and synthesize God’s design of the world and its reflection in mathematical and formulaic laws. Your mathematics, engineering, and science professors have advanced degrees in their fields, are open to mentoring you and praying for you, and want to help you succeed.
Starting your academic journey with an associate degree is a great way to find your professional passions. While you complete mathematics courses, you will also take general education courses. This can help you decide which career field you want to pursue before committing to a more specialized bachelor’s degree.
Best of all, the credit hours you complete in this associate degree can potentially be used towards a bachelor’s degree with us! No matter the direction that God leads you, you can be confident in the education that you’re receiving. Our professors have years of experience in mathematics-related fields, so you can know that you are receiving a world-class education.
What Will You Learn in Our Associate Degree in STEM Mathematics?
Our associate degree in mathematics can help equip you with the mathematical and computing training needed to be more competitive in today’s digitally advanced world. Throughout this degree, you can learn how to solve problems using appropriate mathematical, technological, and scientific methods.
Our mathematics degree is designed so that you can have an understanding of calculus I and II, with options to take classes like differential equations, linear algebra, or multivariable calculus.
The following are some of the specific topics you will explore in this degree:
Computer ethics and algorithm design
Differentiation of functions, series, limits, and advanced methods of integration
Integration of polar coordinates, parameterization, and slope fields of differential equations
Probability density functions
Proof techniques and Boolean algebra
By majoring in STEM, you can feel confident in knowing that your degree program can help prepare you for a variety of STEM fields. If you hope to become an engineer, you may want to complete courses in linear algebra and differential equations. If you want to pursue a bachelor’s in math, you can take abstract algebra. 
Featured Courses
CSIS 110 – Introduction to Computing Sciences
MATH 131 – Calculus and Analytic Geometry I
MATH 132 – Calculus and Analytical Geometry II
MATH 211 – Introduction to Statistical Analysis
Highlights of Our STEM Mathematics Associate Degree Program
Our degree in STEM math can help prepare you for numerous careers in an ever-growing field.
You can develop the advanced mathematical skills necessary to succeed in countless bachelor’s degrees and financially rewarding occupations.
All our professors have real-life experience in the field and teach from a biblical worldview.
We are a teaching university, which means our professors are in the classroom working hands-on with you every week."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/aeronautics/bachelors/certificate-in-aviation-maintenance-technician/","Get the Credentials You Need with Our Aviation Maintenance Technician Certificate
Are you looking for a fast-track to an Airframe and Powerplant (A&P) license? At Liberty, we offer a 45 credit-hour Aviation Maintenance Technician Certificate that can help you complete the courses you need to get on track for your dream job.
In this program, you will study in a concentrated cohort format designed to last only three consecutive terms. Within a year, you can walk away with transferrable college credits and the license you need to get started in your field. With professors who care about your future as much as you do, walking you through sometimes complex course material in maintenance mathematics and aircraft systems, there’s no limit to how far your certificate can take you.
With a worldwide need for more than 640,000 aircraft mechanics in the next 20 years, you will want to get started as soon as possible. Our aviation maintenance certificate graduates have gone on to work as aircraft mechanics, service technicians, and aircraft systems assemblers. Train with us to gain the skills you need to stand out and land a rewarding job in aeronautics.
What Will You Learn?
Our aviation maintenance technician certificate is designed to help you become certified as an aircraft mechanic with ratings in Airframe and Powerplant (A&P). In order to prepare for this license, you will complete courses in a range of aircraft systems. From airframe auxiliary and electrical systems to turbine engines and airframe structures, you will gain a strong foundation in the mechanical aeronautics field. You will also complete a course in maintenance mathematics, as well as aircraft sciences.
Review the Certificate Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Certificate Courses
AVMT 101 – Maintenance Mathematics
AVMT 105 – Aircraft Weight & Balance
AVMT 207 – Hydraulic & Pneumatic Systems
AVMT 221 – Propeller Systems
Aviation Technician Certificate Highlights
Within 15 years, Liberty’s aviation program has grown from just four to over 400 residential students, not to mention our additional online student population. No matter how far we have come, we never stop pushing our programs to be the best they can be for students like you.
Some of the major benefits of being a Liberty student in the undergraduate certificate in aviation maintenance technician include:
Obtaining an Aviation Maintenance Certification: A&P (Airframe & Powerplant) license, which is a credential employers seek.
Professors who know their students by name, providing prayer and support to each one.
Our students are selected for top-line internships at major airlines and aviation companies, with opportunities to travel around the world.
The School of Aeronautics operates state-of-the-art flight simulators for enhanced learning.
Students have the opportunity to investigate real-world aviation issues by utilizing our research lab!
Admission Requirements
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/casas/associate/technical-studies/","Use Your Trade to Impact Eternity with Our Associate of Applied Science in Technical Studies Degree 
At Liberty, we Train Champions for Christ who have a passion for leading with excellence and integrity in every trade. We have partnered with the Virginia Technical Institute (VTI) to offer OSHA 10 and National Center for Construction Education and Research (NCCER) accredited courses in carpentry, plumbing, welding, HVAC, and electrical studies.
These trade programs further our mission to develop “Christ-centered men and women with the values, knowledge, and skills essential to impact the world” as we believe the related skills are critical to a functioning infrastructure and society. Whether you are considering a career abroad or simply want to expand your opportunities for employment and Christian service upon graduation, adding trade training to your degree will positively affect your professional future.
As a student on our campus, you will be engaged in our dynamic faith-based Christian environment filled with opportunities to grow spiritually, excel academically, and achieve your maximum potential. By earning your associate’s degree in technical studies, you can receive the training you need to enter your trade better prepared for success that impacts the world for Christ.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Associate Degree in Technical Studies?
In addition to preparing you to pursue an apprenticeship toward journeyman and state certification, our residential Associate of Applied Science (AAS) in Technical Studies degree program offers you the opportunity to serve others while gaining relevant experience in Lynchburg and abroad.
Through our trips with LU Serve Now, you will be able to give back while gaining experience in both construction and disaster relief situations. At Liberty, we not only want to prepare you for a career but a life that makes an impact on others.
What Will You Learn in Our Technical Studies Associate Degree Program?
In our applied science technical studies degree, you will learn how to maintain a budget, explore the effects of the economy on trades, and create a safe work environment. In addition to the OSHA 10 certification you’ll earn, you can also obtain your CPR certification so that you will be prepared to respond if an accident happens in your place of work.
In your trade courses, you will learn the necessary terms and regulations you need to know to practice your craft as well as how to read building plans and construction drawings. No matter what trade you choose, your classes will combine lectures with practical, hands-on instruction, so you are prepared to start your career after graduation.
View the Degree Completion Plan and featured courses below for more information on what you’ll learn!
Featured Courses
CRFT 101 – Introduction to Craft Skills
ECON 110 – Survey of Economics
ELTC 101 – Foundations of Electricity
HLTH 205 – Accident Prevention and Care
Highlights of Our Technical Studies Associate’s Degree Program
You can receive OSHA 10 and NCCER certification by earning your AAS in Technical Studies.
Choose from five different trades that offer a variety of mission and employment opportunities.
As a Liberty student, you have the option of transferring earned credits from your associate in technical studies degree to our B.S. in Interdisciplinary Studies. This gives you the ability to add a second trade, business classes, or another area of study to your degree that will help you achieve your career goals.
We are dedicated to supporting our students, and our Career Center offers résumé review services and interview practice, as well as opportunities to connect with potential employers."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/masters/certificate-in-epidemiology/","Prepare for a Graduate Degree While Learning about the Spread and Prevention of Disease
If you are interested in understanding human health and best practices in disease prevention research, a graduate certificate in epidemiology may be a great choice for you! Whether your bachelor’s degree is in public health or an unrelated field, a graduate certificate can also better prepare you for a master’s degree in epidemiology.
Epidemiologists work in public health to investigate patterns and causes of disease or injury. In your certificate courses, you will learn how to reduce the risk and occurrence of negative health outcomes as you engage in research centered on community education and health policy.
By learning about the field of epidemiology, you can prepare for a career in public health with a specialty in one of the following areas:
Chronic diseases
Environmental health
Infectious diseases
Maternal health
Mental health
Public health emergency response
Substance abuse
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
What Will You Learn in Our Graduate Certificate in Epidemiology?
Liberty’s Graduate Certificate in Epidemiology provides a fast-track to understanding how to best prevent the spread of disease both locally and internationally.
By taking epidemiology classes, you can develop research skills vital to discovering links between health risk factors and disease. You will also discover how diseases are being prevented in the U.S. and how its processes compare to the public health policies found in developing countries.
Earning your certificate from a Christian university also allows you to see disease prevention in light of God’s purposes for humanity – from creation to the fall to eventual redemption. With courses centered on Liberty’s mission to Train Champions for Christ, you can be confident that you will be better able to show God’s love after completing your certificate.
View the Certificate Completion Plan, and check out the courses you will be taking in this program.
Required Courses
HLTH 501 – Biostatistics
HLTH 503 – Principles of Epidemiology
HLTH 511 – Research Methods in Public Health
HLTH 552 – Chronic Disease Prevention and Management
HLTH 625 – Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases
HLTH 642 – Food-borne Illness Prevention
HLTH 650 – Field Epidemiology
HLTH 651 – Epidemiologic Research Methods
Highlights of Our Graduate Epidemiology Certificate
Join our Eta Sigma Gamma chapter to receive career and professional growth opportunities.
Potential certification as a Certified Health Education Specialist (CHES) and in Public Health (CPH).
You will have access to professional-level research equipment including a gene sequencer, tissue culture facility, fluorescent microscope, LICOR imager, and more.
As a teaching university, professors with extensive backgrounds in health-related fields teach the classes and labs you take. Our faculty members hold doctoral degrees from leading institutions nationwide and are experienced in academia and government.
Immerse yourself in engaging research projects where you could study things like algae biofuels, Alzheimer’s disease, cancer, DNA analysis, crayfish parasites, and more!
Admission Requirements for Graduate Certificate Students
Every application is reviewed on a case-by-case basis, and all applicants must submit the following documents* and meet the minimum requirements for admission:
Admission application
Official bachelor’s degree transcripts with a 2.5 GPA or higher
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/aeronautics/bachelors/medium-unmanned-aerial-systems-certificate/","Become an Industry Leader in the Exciting Field of Unmanned Aircraft
Are you considering a career in the growing field of military or commercial drone operation? Liberty University offers a certificate in medium unmanned aerial systems (UAS) that you can complete in just one semester! That means you can pursue your career goals, earn credentials in your field, and get to work without stopping to complete a 2- or 4-year degree.
Even if you already work in the field of aviation, pursuing certification can help you stand out for promotions, new positions, or increased earning potential. Our UAS certificate can help you become exceptionally more marketable to employers as you study hands-on with our partner, Textron Systems – a trusted leader in unmanned aircraft since the 1980s. 
The UAS industry is expanding at an increasing rate with the market for commercial and civilian drones anticipated to grow by about 20% by 2020.
Our School of Aeronautics is a center of excellence for aviation professionals and seeks to inspire the next generation of Christian aviation leaders. Let us come alongside you to provide the training you need to make an impact in this cutting-edge industry.

Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
What Will You Learn in Our Undergraduate Certificate in Medium UAS?
You can be confident that your undergraduate certificate in medium UAS will help you become more hirable as you learn how to fly and maintain an industry-leading UAS platform. This program can help you obtain certification as a UAS crew member and maintenance technician. We work with Textron Systems to cross-train all our students in both flight and maintenance operations.
Some of the other key concepts you will learn in our medium UAS program include:
How to launch, fly, and recover a fully autonomous fixed-wing aircraft
How to work in team settings with hands-on projects and simulators
How to maintain equipment and troubleshoot issues
Safety and integrity principles vital to the aviation discipline
View the Certificate Completion Plan, and check out the courses you will be taking in our certificate program!
Certificate Courses
AVIA 230 – Unmanned Aerial Systems
AVIA 323 – UAS Avionics and Powerplants
AVIA 335 – Medium UAS Ground and Flight I
AVIA 446 – Medium UAS Ground and Flight II
AVIA 447 – Medium UAS Ground and Flight III
AVMX 445 – Medium UAS Maintenance I
Highlights of Our Unmanned Aerial Systems Certificate
After completion, students will have 10+ hours of actual flight time and another 18-20 hours of simulated flight time.
This program qualifies as a job training certification.
This certificate is great for students with a civilian or military aviation maintenance background, as it allows for more training and specific industry certification in UAS maintenance.
You can get closer to your career goals without spending the time and money associated with a bachelor’s degree.
If you choose to pursue our Bachelor of Science in Unmanned Aircraft Operations or our Bachelor of Science in Aviation Maintenance – UAS, your credits can easily transfer so you can finish your degree faster!
The UAS industry is a highly specialized and rapidly expanding aviation field.
Many of the jobs within the UAS field support our nation’s infrastructure and military, both nationally and around the world.
*Military benefits from the Veterans Administration are not accepted at this time for the Medium Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) Certificate.
Admission Requirements
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
Proof of U.S. citizenship
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received.
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government website at http://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/masters/certificate-in-global-health/","Ease into Graduate Public Health Courses Before You Start Your Master’s Degree
If you are looking for a way to combine your love for travel with your heart for people, a career in global public health may be a great fit for you. As you finish your bachelor’s degree and consider your next educational steps, consider a graduate certificate, especially if you are not ready to commit to a master’s degree program.
At Liberty, we want to help you get the best start possible in your public health career. Our Graduate Certificate in Global Health is designed to open your eyes to the healthcare needs of underdeveloped countries while equipping you with skills and knowledge you can take with you into a master’s degree or future career in the field.
Whether you want to serve as a missionary, using your knowledge of healthcare as a means of speaking into someone’s life, or you want to partner with a nonprofit organization and become a professional health worker, this certificate is a great way to get started. So what are you waiting for? Get your foot in the door with a Graduate Certificate in Global Health from Liberty.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
What Will You Learn?
Working in public health doesn’t limit you to a career in the United States. By completing a certificate in global health, you will learn how to integrate effective healthcare principles in communities and cultures around the globe.
Gain insight into cultural influences on health behavior so you can provide care with gentleness and respect. From implementing better sanitation and hygiene methods to utilizing community healthcare schemes and appropriate technology available to you, our courses will help you see public health in a completely new light. 
View the Certificate Completion Plan, and check out the courses you will be taking in our health promotion certificate!
Graduate Certificate Global Health Courses
HLTH 620 – Introduction to Global Health
HLTH 622 – Primary Healthcare in Developing Countries
HLTH 623 – Cultural Aspects of Health Behavior
HLTH 624 – Sanitation in Developing Countries
HLTH 625 – Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases
Global Health Certificate Highlights
Join our Eta Sigma Gamma chapter to receive career and professional growth opportunities.
Potential certification as a Certified Health Education Specialist (CHES) and in Public Health (CPH).
Access to professional-level research equipment including a gene sequencer, tissue culture facility, fluorescent microscope, LICOR imager, and more.
As a teaching university, experienced professors teach the classes and labs you take. Our faculty are experienced in academia, industry, and government, holding doctoral degrees from leading institutions nationwide.
Immerse yourself in engaging research projects where you could study algae biofuels, Alzheimer’s disease, cancer, DNA analysis, crayfish parasites, and more!
Admission Requirements
Every application is reviewed on a case-by-case basis, and all applicants must submit the following documents* and meet the minimum requirements for admission:
Admission application
Official bachelor’s degree transcripts with a 2.5 GPA or higher
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/certificate-in-teaching-english-as-a-second-language/","Teach Around the World with Our Certificate in Teaching English as a Second Language (TESL)
Does the idea of traveling the world while educating others interest you? Liberty University’s Certificate in Teaching English as a Second Language (TESL) provides the opportunity for you to pursue your love of travel and education simultaneously.
When you graduate with your TESL certificate, you’ll have the training and experience you need to pursue this career field. You’re giving yourself the opportunity to teach people from other countries how to speak English, and often, you can use this opportunity to spread the Gospel to limited or unreached people groups. Teaching around the world has never been easier when you have your TESL certificate! You’ll have the opportunity to teach English to foreign speakers in places like Brazil, China, France, West Africa, or Pakistan.
The great thing about receiving this certificate is that along with linguistics and TESL courses, you’ll complete a 135-hour internship. This will give you the training you need to pursue a teaching career with confidence. We have internship programs available to you around the world in Central America, South America, Asia, Europe, and Africa.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
What Will You Learn?
Throughout our TESL certificate program, you will gain comprehensive knowledge in applied grammar, linguistics and second language acquisition. It is important that you know not only English but also the syntax and phonology of the major languages spoken throughout the world. This training will enable you to prepare a curriculum with your student’s language in mind. You will also learn about the various activities and class exercises that will help not only make you a better instructor but also enable students to have fun while you are teaching them.
View the Certificate Completion Plan, and check out the courses you will be taking in our certificate program!
TESL Certificate Courses
LING 301 – Introduction to Linguistics
TESL 333 – Modern Grammar
TESL 373 – Applied Grammar
TESL 403 – Second Language Acquisition
TESL 405 – Issues and Practices in TES/FL
TESL 499 – TES/FL Internship (135 hours)
TESL Certificate Highlights
Enjoy opportunities for teaching positions on almost every continent.
Get a chance to complete a two-month internship at the Liberty University Spanish Institute in Guatemala.
Other teaching programs are available in Brazil, France, China, Guinea, Japan, Pakistan, Austria, and Columbia, as well as internship opportunities in Jordan, West Africa, and Thailand.
Admission Requirements
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/business/masters/certificate-in-general-business/","Get Ahead with Our General Business Certificate
Are you an up and coming entrepreneur, business monger, or financial analyst? Whatever your status in the business world, our General Business Certificate provides the core business knowledge and training you need to excel in your field.
The great part about a master’s level certificate in business is that you’ll receive training in the current best-practices of one of the most steadily growing and lucrative career fields. You’ll gain knowledge of legal issues, international business, and organizational structures and behaviors. Understanding these core parts of business management will give the leg up you need to advance in your career or get started in a business-related position.
So what can you expect from this program? We have world-class professors with professional experience, business-related degrees, and a Christian worldview who are here to teach you about business from a real-life and ethical perspective. Plus, our School of Business building contains state-of-the-art facilities with cutting-edge technology, including our simulation stock trading rooms and interactive classrooms.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
What Will You Learn?
Our Graduate Certificate in General Business features courses that provide graduate-level training in essential business concepts like communications, business law, international business and intercultural communication techniques, and leadership theory and practices. As with all of our certificate programs and degrees, our business certificate is built on a solid Christ-centered foundation that will help you integrate your faith with your professional life.
View the Certificate Completion Plan, and check below for courses you will be taking in our certificate program!
Required Courses
BMAL 500 – Organizational Behavior 
or BMAL 590 – Business Common Professional Components
BUSI 561 – Legal Issues in Business
BUSI 604 – International Business
Business Certificate Highlights
All of our professors have advanced degrees and years of experience in the field, so you know you are learning from the best.
We tailor our programs for the working professional, which means you have more flexibility with evening classes, intensives, and online courses.
Our graduates are prepared for successful careers in business, with many of our alumni working for companies like Wells Fargo Investment Banking, AT&T, Bank of America, and IBM.
Our 78,000-square-foot School of Business building houses various academic centers, simulation stock trading rooms, and interactive classrooms.
Admission Requirements
Every application is reviewed on a case-by-case basis, and all applicants must submit the following documents* and meet the minimum requirements for admission:
Admission application
Unofficial college transcripts with at least a 2.5 GPA and a completed Transcript Request Form. An official final college transcript showing a completed Bachelor’s degree is required before first-semester enrollment.
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/divinity/masters/certificate-in-greek/","Become a Biblical Scholar with a Greek Certificate
Are you passionate about understanding God’s Word and ministering to others? Maybe you’re a pastor, youth leader, author, or educator. Whatever the calling is on your life, pursuing Liberty University’s Certificate in Greek is an exciting way for you to dive deeper into your understanding of the Bible so you can more effectively share the Gospel with others.
What you’ll find when you’re studying Greek is that the courses in this certificate will extend your appreciation of the Gospel to a new level. You’ll understand Jesus’ own words in the language in which they were originally written. With an earned certificate, you can advance your career and your skillset in whatever type of ministry you desire.
Pursuing this certificate also means taking advantage of all the benefits that our John W. Rawlings School of Divinity offers. Each of our professors have real-life ministerial experience, and are either working on their doctorate or have already earned it. You will also have access to state-of-the-art facilities in our Freedom Tower like a massive Scriptorium, a working replica of the Gutenberg printing press, a 7-projector immersive classroom, and homiletics teaching lab.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your certificate from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
What Will You Learn?
Our certificate in Greek will lead you through a study of the New Testament’s culture, language, and historical context, culminating in an exegetical breakdown of the book of Galatians. You will learn the foundational lexical, semantic, and syntax tools you need to understand and interpret biblical Greek.
On a more practical level, you will learn how valuable Greek is in interpreting Scripture and how to share Greek studies in a way your audience will understand. View the Certificate Completion Plan, and check out the courses you will be taking in our certificate program!
Required Courses
NGRK 520 – Beginning Greek I
NGRK 525 – Beginning Greek II
NGRK 620 – Greek Syntax
NGRK 643 – Greek Exegesis: Galatians
Highlights of Our Graduate Certificate in Greek
Learn under professors who are published and have advanced degrees in their field as you pursue a degree founded on the authority of Scripture and conservative evangelical theology.
Our John W. Rawlings School of Divinity is the world’s largest accredited school for religious studies and ministerial training.
Gain internship opportunities with churches and parachurches locally, nationally, and globally.
Our 17-story School of Divinity Freedom Tower contains a 7-projector immersive classroom, an interactive classroom that utilizes teleconferencing capabilities, and state-of-the-art homiletics teaching lab.
Our Freedom Tower’s Scriptorium houses a $1 million collection of rare books and Bibles donated by the Rawlings family.
Optional Monday-only courses are available for students juggling work, family, studies, and church commitments."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/masters/certificate-in-nutrition/","Prepare for Your Future in Public Health with a Graduate Certificate in Nutrition
Now that you’ve completed your bachelor’s degree, you may be wondering what’s next. If you are interested in pursuing a master’s degree but want to get your feet wet first, a graduate certificate is a great route to take. And if your dream career involves the health and nutrition field, Liberty’s Graduate Certificate in Nutrition can help you get started.
Our nutrition certificate is designed to prepare you for the world of public health, specifically as it relates to human nutrition. Our courses will help you develop best practices in disease prevention while equipping you to improve quality of life across various populations. As obesity and dietary complications rise in our nation, your skills in this field will be very marketable and sought after.
Aside from completing master’s level courses, you may be wondering what you will gain by earning a graduate certificate in this field. First of all, our nutrition certificate is a great way to see how you do at the graduate level while adding to your professional resume. Second, if you foresee future graduate studies in our Master of Public Health – Nutrition degree, you will be able to transfer in all of your completed credits and finish your degree in a third of the time.
What Will You Learn?
Our Graduate Certificate in Nutrition focuses on major areas of illness and disease prevention. Discover how to combat diabetes, obesity, and eating disorders using current research in genetics, chronic disease, and medical nutritional therapy. Since this certificate is not geared to the medical field, you will develop more holistic methods for supporting healthy lifestyles at a larger scale, not just for individuals.
View the Certificate Completion Plan, and check out the courses you will be taking in our nutrition certificate!
Featured Courses
HLTH 640 – Principles of Nutrition
HLTH 642 – Food-borne Illness Prevention
HLTH 643 – Public Health Nutrition
HLTH 644 – Diabetes, Obesity, and Eating Disorders
HLTH 645 – Performance Nutrition for the Physically Active
Highlights of our Nutrition Certificate
Potential certification as a Certified Health Education Specialist (CHES) and in Public Health (CPH).
You will have the opportunity to join Eta Sigma Gamma and improve career opportunities and professional growth development.
Meet with like-minded professionals who have the same goals of improving community health locally and globally.
Admission Requirements
Every application is reviewed on a case-by-case basis, and all applicants must submit the following documents* and meet the minimum requirements for admission:
Admission application
Official bachelor’s degree transcripts with a 2.5 GPA or higher
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/masters/certificate-in-health-promotion/","Continue Your Public Health Training with Liberty’s Graduate Certificate in Health Promotion
Whether your bachelor’s degree is related to the field of health sciences or not, our Graduate Certificate in Health Promotion can help you prepare for a career in public health. Imagine gaining the skills you need to implement health and wellness methods for countless people. If you are looking to take the next step towards a career in this field, but aren’t sure if you want to go straight into a master’s degree, our graduate certificate may be for you!
Our health promotion certificate can help you learn how to manage health planning, communication, and advocacy. Our courses are designed to give you real-world principles to apply in areas such as disease prevention and lifestyle improvement. Whatever population you feel passionate about serving with your career, our health promotion courses will train you with excellence and integrity.
And if you are looking to complete a Master of Public Health in Health Promotion degree down the road, this program will provide you with foundational knowledge in health promotion methods and best practices. Not only that, but your courses will transfer seamlessly into our public health and health promotion master’s degree so that once you start your graduate degree, you can finish in a third of the time.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
What Will You Learn?
As you pursue our health promotions certificate, you will study public health issues as they relate to community health at the local, state, and national levels. Our courses focus on acquiring relevant data to create effective program plans and assessments for specific people groups. Additionally, you will get the chance to use your research to explore counseling, public campaigns, social media, and political processes to advocate for better health among diverse populations.
View the Certificate Completion Plan, and check out the courses you will be taking in our health promotion certificate!
Required Courses
HLTH 630 – Principles of Community Health
HLTH 632 – Health Program Planning
HLTH 633 – Health Program Evaluation
HLTH 634 – Health Communication and Advocacy
HLTH 635 – Health Agency Management
Highlights of Our Health Promotion Certificate
Join our Eta Sigma Gamma chapter to receive career and professional growth opportunities.
Potential certification as a Certified Health Education Specialist (CHES) and in Public Health (CPH).
Our professional-level research equipment includes a gene sequencer, tissue culture facility, fluorescent microscope, LICOR imager, and more.
As a teaching university, experienced professors teach the classes and labs you take. Our faculty are experienced in academia, industry, and government, holding doctoral degrees from leading institutions nationwide.
Immerse yourself in engaging research projects where you could study algae biofuels, Alzheimer’s disease, cancer, DNA analysis, crayfish parasites, and more!
Admission Requirements
Every application is reviewed on a case-by-case basis, and all applicants must submit the following documents* and meet the minimum requirements for admission:
Admission application
Official bachelor’s degree transcripts with a 2.5 GPA or higher
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/academics/","College is about getting a great education.
For centuries, higher education focused on theories, history, and ideas.
These are worthy subjects, but the world has changed.
At Liberty, theories, history, and ideas are important. You’ll learn them — but you’ll also learn today’s workplace skills.
You’ll learn how to become the kind of employee that people want to work with — and work for.
Here, you’ll work with industry-standard equipment and study under seasoned professionals. You’ll sharpen your soft skills, leadership abilities, and problem-solving techniques. You’ll do ground-breaking research, but you’ll also network and make connections. And you’ll learn all of it from a biblical worldview.
Our mission of Training Champions for Christ means that every area of your academic career has been purposefully designed to help you excel in the real world without leaving your convictions behind.
Did You Know?
The Liberty University Department of Theatre Arts’ original production, “Bloodroot: The Ballad of Clinch Mountain,” written and performed by a team of female students, was selected as a regional finalist by the Kennedy Center American College Theatre Festival (KCACTF) and won two national awards: “Distinguished New Work” and “Distinguished Performance in a Play.”
95.7% of Liberty Law’s 2018 graduating class passed the bar exam on the first try. (The national average was 75%).
92% of 2017 LU nursing grads passed the NCLEX on their first try, which is above the state average.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and National Security Agency (NSA) have recognized Liberty as a National Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Education for the B.S. in Information Technology: Data Networking and Security.
Liberty University’s School of Law was ranked No. 3 in the Top Ten Competition Law Schools list released by the American Bar Association.
Education graduates have maintained a 100% state board pass rate since 2014.
Liberty’s Debate Team is the only collegiate debate team in the country to sweep all three national tournament rankings in one year — and they’ve done it 8 times.
Liberty is one of only 7% of colleges and universities in the country to receive a Carnegie classification of “Doctoral University” with a research designation.
Liberty Law was rated the #1 Christian Law School 2019 by preLaw Magazine.
Liberty students have acted on television and the silver screen in productions including “The Song,” “Quantico,” “The Walking Dead,” “S.W.A.T.” and “Homeland.”
Liberty’s School of Aeronautics flight team won the prestigious Loening Trophy — awarded to the outstanding all-around collegiate aviation program in the nation — in 2017, 2018, and 2019.
The flight team also captured the American Airlines Safety Award three years in a row.
Liberty Law hosted both the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit and the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims for oral arguments in 2018-19.
Liberty’s Cyber Defense team placed third in the 2019 Mid-Atlantic Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition (MACCDC).
Cinematic Arts students have worked on feature film projects like the Kendrick brothers’ “Overcomer,” “Courageous,” “Fireproof,” and “War Room.”
Liberty’s Athletic Training Program has won the Virginia Athletic Training Association State Quiz Bowl Competition two out of the last four years.
Liberty’s Moot court team won national championships in the Notre Dame Religious Freedom Tournament, the Prince Evidence Moot Court Competition, and the National Tax Moot Court Competition.
The Liberty University Department of Theatre Arts’ original production, “Bloodroot: The Ballad of Clinch Mountain,” written and performed by a team of female students, was selected as a regional finalist by the Kennedy Center American College Theatre Festival (KCACTF) and won two national awards: “Distinguished New Work” and “Distinguished Performance in a Play.”
With over 300 undergraduate and graduate options to choose from, which degree fits you best? Take a look at the 15 colleges and schools that make up Liberty University and imagine what your future could be. 
School of Aeronautics
See how you can become a commercial, corporate, missionary, or military pilot, a drone operator, an aviation maintenance technician, or one of several other exciting careers in the aviation industry.
College of Arts and Sciences
Study English, family and consumer sciences, history, mathematics, a foreign language (American Sign Language, Chinese, French, German, or Spanish), philosophy, or custom-create your own degree through our interdisciplinary studies program.
School of Behavioral Sciences
Interested in becoming a counselor, social worker, or an industrial psychologist? Explore these and other exciting careers.
School of Business
More than 25 specializations and our 3 + 1 business degree — where you can earn both your undergraduate and graduate degrees in four years — will help you get the business degree you need to prepare you for the future you want. 
School of Communication & the Arts
Whether you’re looking for a career in acting, graphic design, journalism, video, strategic communications, or another related field, we can help you get what it takes to become a professional in the area you’re passionate about.
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity
See how you can become well-equipped for any full-time ministry calling — whether in biblical studies, camping, global studies, women’s leadership, youth ministry, apologetics, or one of many other areas of church or parachurch ministry. 
School of Education
Influence the future by impacting the next generation. Learn to work in any classroom — including special or gifted education — or as a school administrator.
School of Engineering
Get a degree in electrical engineering, computer engineering, mechanical engineering, or industrial and systems engineering.
Helms School of Government
Select from degree programs in criminal justice, government, public policy, homeland security, international relations, pre-law, or public administration, and then tailor your choice to match your career goals.
School of Health Sciences
Want to prepare for medical, dental, pharmacy, veterinary, or physician assistant school? Or study biotechnology, forensic science, or environmental biology? Or become an athletic trainer, respiratory therapist, or health and fitness professional? Learn about all that LU can offer you in the field of health sciences. 
School of Law
One of Liberty’s professional schools, Liberty Law is a distinctively Christian law school that offers 11 different certificates of concentration, including criminal justice, business law, family and juvenile law, constitutional law, and international law. 
School of Music
As the seventh largest music school in the country, Liberty’s School of Music offers more than 25 degrees in areas like performance, songwriting, producing, and worship.
School of Nursing
Take advantage of Liberty’s high-fidelity simulators, standardized patients, obstetrics theater, and skill trainers, and learn to become an outstanding nurse or advance your nursing career.
College of Osteopathic Medicine
One of Liberty’s professional schools, LUCOM trains physicians in both clinical excellence and compassion.
Want to study as a global citizen?
Whether you want to travel with your department and get class credit, do an internship overseas, or take an entire semester to study abroad, Liberty’s LU Send will work with you to find the right international fit.
LU Send:
Works together with the Provost office to craft a variety of academically-focused travel opportunities for students during their time at Liberty.
Has partnered with trusted study abroad organizations to offer opportunities in over 150 locations around the world.
Also partners with organizations that provide internships abroad for nearly all fields of study here at Liberty University.
How Can Your Degree Make a Difference in the Real World?
Psychology, social work, and counseling faculty and students regularly travel to Greece, Spain, Rwanda, Nepal, India, China, Moldova, Portugal, Ecuador, and other areas to provide and train others in trauma care and counseling for human-trafficking and sex-trafficking victims.*
The trauma training that graduate counseling student Megan R. practiced in Greece not only prepared her to get a job in Las Vegas helping victims of sex abuse and trafficking — but also positioned her to provide emergency grief and trauma counseling to those affected by the 2017 Las Vegas shooting. 
*Teams also participate in reconciliation and forgiveness facilitation and provide care and counseling in refugee camps.
“Before Greece, I knew a lot of things intellectually. I read the books. I studied my Bible. I knew a lot of things I couldn’t fully understand or believe until I experienced it. I knew sex trafficking was happening, but I didn’t fully understand until I walked the streets.
I knew that God knows my heart, but until I found myself in a gorgeous country with friends I’ll now have for life, I couldn’t have fully believed that He KNEW me. My time in Greece changed, not only the course of my career, but the course of my walk with the Lord as well.”
—Megan R."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/divinity/masters/certificate-in-hebrew/","Learn the Language of the Old Testament with a Certificate in Hebrew
Are you passionate about understanding God’s Word so that you can better share it with others? Maybe you’re a pastor, theologian, author, ministry professional, or perhaps you are just excited about growing your relationship with Christ. Regardless of your profession or your role in ministry, pursuing Liberty University’s Graduate Certificate in Hebrew will allow you to appreciate and understand the Old Testament in its original language.
Receiving a certificate in Hebrew studies opens up many opportunities for you. You’ll have a deeper understanding of God and the Bible to enhance your relationship with Christ. Plus, you’ll learn how to accurately preach and share from the Old Testament with the increased level of linguistic and biblical information you receive. You’ll be set apart in your ministry and have greater opportunities to pursue higher positions with your knowledge of the Hebrew language.
Each of our professors have real-life experience in ministry, and are working on their doctorate degrees or have already earned them. They are prepared to mentor, guide and teach you from their experiences and biblical knowledge and training. You’ll also have access to amazing resources and state-of-the-art facilities, such as our Scriptorium, 7-projector immersive classroom, and homiletics teaching lab, all housed in our Freedom Tower.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
What Will You Learn?
The training you receive in our Hebrew certificate provides you with a deeper understanding of God’s Word by studying the original language of the Old Testament. Through studying various Old Testament texts, you will learn the importance of understanding cultural, political, and historical contexts so you can correctly interpret Scripture. You will study basic aspects of the Hebrew language (such as syntax) so you can better understand the original context of the Old Testament and explain that context to your audience.
View the Certificate Completion Plan, and check out the courses you will be taking in our certificate program!
Hebrew Certificate Courses
OTCL 520 – Beginning Hebrew I
OTCL 525 – Beginning Hebrew II
OTCL 640 – Hebrew Syntax and Exegesis
Highlights of Our Hebrew Certificate Program
Learn under professors who are published and have advanced degrees in their field as you pursue a degree founded on the authority of Scripture and conservative evangelical theology.
Our John W. Rawlings School of Divinity is the world’s largest accredited school for religious studies and ministerial training.
Gain internship opportunities with churches and parachurches locally, nationally, and globally.
Our 17-story School of Divinity Freedom Tower contains a 7-projector immersive classroom, an interactive classroom that utilizes teleconferencing capabilities, and state-of-the-art homiletics teaching lab.
Our Freedom Tower’s Scriptorium houses a $1 million collection of rare books and Bibles donated by the Rawlings family.
Optional Monday-only courses are available for students juggling work, family, studies, and church commitments."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/doctoral/anatomy-and-cell-biology/","Make Your Mark on Academia and Medical Sciences with Liberty’s Anatomy and Cell Biology PhD Program
Are you in search of an advanced, doctoral cell biology and anatomy training program? Maybe you’re currently a medical researcher who wants to take the next step in your career, or maybe you want to teach college courses someday. If so, Liberty’s PhD in Cell Biology and Anatomy may be for you!
Lend your expertise to a field that is striving to solve major world problems. Earn a degree that provides advanced training in the prevention and treatment of diseases that affect people globally. From cancer to diabetes, your research and lab experience can make a difference in the lives of countless patients. Liberty’s PhD in Cell Biology and Anatomy can help equip you with the research-focused courses you’ll need to pave your way in a field that never stops growing and changing.
If you are looking to become a university professor, our doctoral cell biology and anatomy degree is a great option. Develop the teaching skills required to lead the next generation of anatomy and biology students, and open their eyes to all the ways they can make a difference in the world of medicine, academics, nursing, and physical therapy.
Whether you are looking for a degree that prepares you for biomedical research, teaching, or cellular biology, this doctoral degree is designed with your academic and career success in mind. Hone your skills under the personal care of professors with years of anatomical sciences research experience and degrees to match in our Center for Natural Sciences. Partner with us and enhance your teaching, research, and medical understanding so you can make a difference in the lives of patients, students, and medical research companies worldwide.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s PhD in Cell Biology and Anatomy Degree Program?
You deserve a university that is just as committed to your success as you are. At Liberty, we strive to provide the best equipment, faculty, and industry resources possible to offer a first-class student experience that can help set you apart from others in your field. Walk away with a doctoral degree in anatomy and cell biology that gives you confidence in your professional skill set. 
Study Hands-On with State-of-the-Art Equipment
At Liberty, we have our own Center for Natural Sciences building devoted to our students who are studying the sciences. As a doctoral student, you will have access to a cadaver lab, 20 major-specific teaching labs, and 6 research labs. Not only that, but you can also learn experientially with professional-level research equipment. This includes a gene sequencer, tissue culture facility, fluorescent microscope, LICOR imager, and more!
Study Under Industry Professionals
We are no ordinary biology grad school — we are a teaching university. This means that our professors do more than research and write curricula — they are in the classroom and research labs with graduate students every week. 
We are proud to have faculty who are experienced in academia, industry, and government and who hold doctoral degrees from leading institutions nationwide. Let these industry professionals come alongside you as you immerse yourself in engaging research projects and study advanced concepts from algae biofuels, to Alzheimer’s disease, to cancer and DNA analysis. At Liberty, we don’t offer a typical PhD in Biological Sciences. Unlike standard biological sciences degrees, we provide a cell biology and anatomy program that offers in-depth, rigorous courses that can help make you a respected, knowledgeable academic.
What Will You Learn in Liberty’s Anatomy and Cell Biology Doctorate Degree?
As a teaching-intensive program, Liberty’s PhD in Anatomy and Cell Biology incorporates hundreds of hours of teaching experience in human anatomy. Your seminar and teaching practicum courses can help prepare you to teach anatomy students of all levels about several branches of biology and anatomy, including the human body and nervous system. 
Throughout our anatomy and cell biology graduate program, you’ll take courses that can help you prepare for your final dissertation, so you can walk away with research results ready to publish. These research-focused courses include a rotation, a dissertation research class, and finally, a dissertation defense course. You will work with faculty throughout the program to help you through this important graduate-school process.
The teaching and research courses make up about 50% of the anatomy and cell biology doctorate degree. The rest of your degree will focus on major areas in the field, including biochemistry, pathology, virology, immunology, genetics, and neurology. View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information!
Featured Courses
BIOM 503 – Human Genetics
BIOM 615 – Advanced Cell Biology
BIOM 630 – Principles of Pathology
Highlights of Our PhD in Anatomy and Cell Biology Program
Teaching spaces in our Center for Natural Sciences include a cadaver lab, 20 major-specific teaching labs, and 6 research labs.
You will have the opportunity to select your own area of emphasis in your teaching so you can influence the direction your experience takes. 
Professional-level research equipment includes a gene sequencer, tissue culture facility, fluorescent microscope, LICOR imager, and more.
Our faculty are experienced in academia, industry, and government, holding doctoral degrees from leading institutions nationwide.
Immerse yourself in engaging research projects where you could study algae biofuels, Alzheimer’s disease, cancer, DNA analysis, crayfish parasites, and more."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/doctoral/clinical-psychology/","Due to the high volume of interest in the Doctor of Psychology program, enrollment is full for Fall 2023. The Liberty University School of Behavioral Sciences is only taking applications for the Fall 2024 and Fall 2025 semesters at this time.
Be on the Cutting Edge of Mental Health Research and Care with the Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology
As a clinical psychologist, you can do more than perform research studies to learn about the human mind – you can touch people’s lives for generations. Through applying the most advanced research and the most profound knowledge of psychology, you can help people heal and grow through mental health challenges. Your studies can contribute to the work of other mental health professionals, allowing you to make an incredible impact. If you want to study to become a clinical psychologist so you can use your skills in research to help people, Liberty’s Doctor of Psychology (Psy.D.) in Clinical Psychology is the right choice for you!
Do I need a master’s in psychology before I can start the Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology?
Liberty’s Psy.D. in Psychology is designed as a 5-year track right after your bachelor’s degree in psychology. In fact, you will complete courses that will earn you a Master of Science in Clinical Psychology while completing your Psy.D.! This format enables you to earn your master’s and a doctorate in less time than earning each degree separately.
Liberty’s Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology is designed to prepare you to evaluate research and to understand the truth about human behavior from a biblical worldview. Our mission is to Train Champions for Christ. We fulfill this mission by training professionals to use science and biblical values to understand the full breadth of the human experience. Our unique, biblically-based approach to this field will prepare you to impact those you work with positively.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology?
With our Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology, you will learn effective clinical techniques, essential behavioral theory, and develop your research and writing expertise. You will be equipped with a thorough understanding of human thought and behavior while formulating your research to further the field.
In this program, you’ll find biblical applications woven into your coursework. This perspective in your research and practical training in psychology will help you develop professional and academic excellence without compromising an ethical appreciation for human life. Additionally, our caring faculty are devoted to helping you grow personally and academically.
How do I know the Psy.D. is the right program for me?
The Doctor of Psychology in Clinical Psychology can be an especially good option for you if:
You already have state licensure and want to expand your options.
You are already a Liberty student.
You want a degree that isn’t just about research.
You want a faith-based doctoral degree in psychology.
You want to gain a license as a clinical psychologist.
You want to pursue academic roles in clinical psychology.
Earning a Psy.D. with Liberty means that you will be trained to critically and biblically engage with research and clinical practice. If you want to engage in the highest level of scholarship while making a direct, positive difference in patients’ lives, Liberty’s Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology is the program for you.
What Will You Learn in Our Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology Degree?
Liberty’s Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology is designed to build on your previous study and experience in human psychology. Through this program, you can develop into a researcher and psychologist who demonstrates ethical and academic excellence while integrating biblical values into your practice.
The Doctor of Psychology in Clinical Psychology is designed to equip you with the top-level credentials, advanced studies in psychology, and practice-focused skills you need to be an expert in the field of mental health. Through this program, you will:
Act in accordance with the APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct, relevant governance, professional standards, and guidelines.
Apply ethical decision‐making processes to meet the most significant challenges of the field.
Conduct evidence‐based mental health assessments consistent with the scope of Health Service Psychology, interpret assessment results, and effectively communicate assessment findings and implications to a range of audiences.
Develop advanced research and scholarship with the potential to meaningfully contribute to the body of scientific, psychological, and professional knowledge.
Learn about the structure of the brain, neurochemistry, and psychopharmacology.
Learn evidence-based therapies like emotion-focused therapies and how to use biofeedback and neurofeedback.
Learn how to administer and interpret cognitive and psychologists tests such as family assessments, behavioral observation scales, objective personality tests, and more.
Learn how to integrate a biblical worldview into the practice of clinical psychology.
Gain experience working in wide range of settings: private practice, hospitals, community based clinics, schools, and churches.
Obtain a solid foundation in research design and statistics.
Provide training, consultation, and supervision to other professionals: psychiatrists, physicians, social workers, and counselors.
Structured Course Sequence and Hands-on Experience
The Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology is designed to follow a pre-set course sequence with built-in opportunities to gain hands-on experience and develop your dissertation research.
In the second year of the program, you will be placed in an affiliated practicum site in the Lynchburg area to gain experience in a clinical setting.
To give you a thorough background of experience and hands-on practice for your dissertation research, you will complete the final year of your program in a clinical internship. Through this process, you will work remotely with your dissertation chair and mentors.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information about what you’ll learn.
Featured Courses
PSYD 601 – Introduction to Clinical Practice II
PSYD 605 – Lifespan Development I
PSYD 610 – Child and Adolescent Psychopathology I
PSYD 706 – Research Design II
Highlights of Our Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology
During the Psy.D. program, you will also earn a Master of Arts in Clinical Psychology after you complete specific courses on the degree plan.* This additional degree will help you complete your clinical requirements while earning your doctorate.
You will learn from faculty members who have years of professional counseling experience with agencies like the Department of Veterans Affairs as well as in schools, churches, and private practices across the nation and around the world.
Graduate assistantships are available for doctoral students.
*Courses to earn the M.A. in Clinical Psychology in passing: PSYD 600, 601, 605, 610, 615, 701, 703, 704, 706, 707, 708, and 796 (twice)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/academics/support/","Inclusive, Supportive, and Committed to Your Fullest Potential
While some colleges believe in being exclusive — admitting only those with the highest test scores and best transcripts — at Liberty, we believe in every student’s potential to succeed.
Here, we’re breaking the mold.
We know that when students are given the extra attention they need, they can achieve more than they ever expected.
Whether you’re a first-year student facing anxieties about college life as you transition from high school or an upperclassman who wants to sharpen new skills, you can find support services designed to boost your confidence and help you reach your highest goals for academic achievement.
College of Applied Studies and Academic Success (CASAS)
CASAS services support you through:
Study skills help
Time management training
Reading skill development
Individual and group tutoring
Academic advising
Academic counseling
Academic Success Workshop Series
Succeeding as a student and as a professional starts with succeeding as a person. Regular workshops helping you develop critical life skills are available and often offered in partnership with individual schools or departments. They cover these and other relevant topics:
Academic Advising
Peer and professional advisors are available during the week and are ready to help you create a plan for success that is uniquely tailored to your individual needs. These plans help you overcome procrastination, improve your test-taking, reading skills, time management, and more.
Academic Success Courses
Academic Success Courses are helpful electives that teach practical study skills. Many of these courses meet once a week and count as 1-hour credit courses. You’ll meet regularly with faculty mentors and gain skills that will give you lifelong benefits.
Tutoring
Need to brush up on a certain subject? Over 50 subject-based tutoring services — in areas like modern languages, health sciences, mathematics, and more — are readily available.
Residential Writing Services
Great writers develop by discussing ideas and improving their writing together, and we want to help you succeed by working with you. Our peer coaches are highly trained to help you wherever you are in the writing process, regardless of your major.
Office of Disability Accommodation Support (ODAS)
If you are a student with a documented disability, you’ll find that Liberty strives to be an inclusive environment offering specialized advocacy, support, and academic services.
Professional Advising
Have questions about financial aid, housing, account holds and balances, personal issues, or roommate conflicts? Professional Advising serves as a liaison with other offices and departments on campus to help you get your questions answered. They’ll also help clarify and explain university policies and procedures."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/business/masters/mba/","Go Further with a Master’s Degree in Business Administration from Liberty! 
Your career as an industry leader in the business field is waiting! Gain the skills and connections you’ll need to navigate this competitive field. Partner your passion with Liberty’s expert professors and academic excellence to go further.
Our Master of Business Administration degrees are designed to prepare you for careers in executive leadership, financial management, marketing research, and healthcare administration. Wherever your aspirations are leading you, we have a business degree to help you get there.
From lucrative positions as a Chief Executive Officer to global outreach as an international ministry worker, our MBA degree is created with you in mind. Our professors have years of industry experience and are excited to mentor you throughout your time with us. Your future in business administration is just a degree away.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Master of Business Administration (MBA) Degree?
You deserve a master’s degree that prepares you to land a financially rewarding job once you graduate. Let us help you develop the skills you need to stand out to future employers.
Business can be a competitive field to break into, but with an MBA from our nonprofit, Christian university, you will be set apart with integrity and academic excellence.
Center for Entrepreneurship 
Our center hosts many programs and events for students to meet with CEO’s, entrepreneurs, and business leaders from all around the world.
Our 2,000-square-foot Center for Entrepreneurship is the largest center within our School of Business.
Our Spark! Incubator training program provides a variety of events created to give you experience with real clients and industry leaders.
More Networking Potential with HandShake
HandShake is a fast and powerful job recruitment platform, where students, university career centers, and employment recruiters can connect.
As a Liberty student, you will receive a free HandShake account where you will showcase your skills to employers across the globe.
We partnered with this cutting edge service with the knowledge that employers are constantly seeking out students from university settings.
What Will You Learn in Our MBA Degree Program?
Our Master of Business Administration degree will provide you with a broad understanding of business operations necessary for a flexible and successful career in business leadership. As a student in this program, you will gain a foundational awareness of marketing management, finance, business law, research, accounting, international business, global economics, human resources, and operations management.
Choose a specialization to take your degree further! We offer specializations in accounting, criminal justice, finance, healthcare management, and human resources, to name a few. You can direct your study to a specific area of business as you become an expert in your field.
Check out our featured courses below for more information.
Featured Courses
BUSI 520 – Strategic Marketing Management
BUSI 530 – Managerial Finance
BUSI 604 – International Business
BUSI 650 – Operations Management
36-Hour MBA Track
Accounting
Criminal Justice Administration
Economics
Executive Coaching
Finance
Healthcare Law and Compliance
Healthcare Management
Human Resources
International Business
Leadership
Marketing
Nonprofit Leadership Management
Project Management
Public Administration
Public Relations
Real Estate Development
Strategic Management
Strategic Media and Digital Content
Supply Chain Management and Logistics
Tourism Management"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/degrees/doctoral/","Deepen Your Knowledge Through Liberty’s Doctoral Programs
With advanced studies and experience in your field, you provide expertise through the confidence of facing and overcoming real-world challenges. But if you’ve found gaps in your training and feel under-equipped to tackle the work in your field, then you’re ready to seek a higher level of knowledge and mastery. By earning your doctorate, you can reach the peak of academic and professional studies in your discipline.
With a Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) or other doctorates, you can engage in the highest levels of scholarship and contribute to the field of human knowledge. Your research and studies can help shape the future of your field and make your mark on it. Do you want to be a standout leader in your discipline? Liberty University’s doctoral programs can help you get the advanced training and studies you need.
Doctorate vs. PhD
Liberty University has many doctoral programs to choose from. Depending on the field, the highest degree may be a Ph.D. program or a doctorate of another type. These degrees are usually considered equivalent as far as being terminal degrees.
However, this comparison may differ from field-to-field. There typically aren’t many alternative tracks within specific disciplines to confuse – if you know the field you want to pursue, that will narrow your list of doctorate types. If you have questions about what doctorate is right for your career, contact our admissions office for more information.
For every field, there’s a degree that shows you’ve reached the top.
Maybe you’re in the field of education, science, or business. Perhaps you’re a counselor, nurse, or full-time ministry professional. At Liberty, we can offer you a doctoral degree in any of these fields, and many more. You’ll master the knowledge of your specialization and become someone that others look to for professional guidance.
So what are you waiting for? Advance your career, increase your knowledge, and revisit the skill or profession you love. Start pursuing your doctoral degree with us today.
Available Degree Programs by School
College of Osteopathic Medicine
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity
School of Behavioral Sciences
School of Engineering
School of Health Sciences
School of Law
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Frequently Asked Questions
Do you have questions about how one of Liberty University’s PhD programs or other doctorates can help you meet your career needs? Below are some common questions and answers about how doctorates work, how they compare, and what they might do for your career.
Are doctoral degrees worth it?
How many years is a doctorate degree?
Are a PhD and a doctorate the same thing?"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/masters/biomedical-sciences/","Prepare for an Exciting Career in STEM with a Master’s Degree in Biomedical Sciences
You are passionate about examining the complexities of the human body. You love learning about the structures and functions of living organisms. You want to turn your passion for health and biology into a career that lets you make exciting discoveries in the field of medicine.
If that sounds like you, Liberty’s Master of Science in Biomedical Sciences (MSBS) degree is a great next step to take in your academic journey. Our program can help provide the tools you need to expand your skill set and hone your expertise.
Whether you want to teach science at the postsecondary level, prepare for medical school, or work in the private sector of the biomedical industry, our graduate degree can help! You can become equipped to pursue a career that lets you impact people around the world. Partner with us and prepare to become a Champion for Christ in your personal and professional life.
What does a biomedical sciences professional do?
Can you get into medical school with a biomedical sciences degree?
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty University’s Biomedical Sciences Master’s Program?
Our beautiful campus in Lynchburg, Virginia, is home to a wealth of top-notch resources designed to enhance your college experience. We are committed to offering quality academics, cutting-edge equipment, and practical training that equips you for the real world.
Choosing Liberty means choosing:
Hands-On Learning Experiences
Liberty has more than 20 teaching and research laboratories where you can study everything from cell biology and forensic science to environmental biology and zoology. By working in these labs, you can take what you’ve learned in the classroom and apply it to the real world. Most importantly, you can gain on-the-job experience that could help you stand out to future employers.
Our labs are filled with professional, state-of-the-art equipment. Take a look at all of the equipment that will be at your disposal! From spectrometers to DNA sequencers, you’ll get to operate the very same equipment used by industry professionals.
Do you want to explore a particular topic in biology or chemistry? If so, you may want to participate in one of our research opportunities. Whether you are interested in conservation research or disease prevention, we provide numerous opportunities for you to conduct your own research, do research simulations, and assist professors in their ongoing research projects. Along the way, you’ll gain valuable, hands-on experience and mentorship from our distinguished faculty.
High-Quality Academics
At Liberty, you will learn from the best. Our faculty have advanced degrees from prestigious institutions and years of industry experience. They can help equip you to grow spiritually, academically, and professionally as you develop expertise in your field.
If you are looking for more ways to expand your knowledge and boost your résumé, join one of our student organizations! Learn how to conduct academic and professional research with the Scientific Research Society (SRS), or prepare for medical school with our Pre-Medical Honor Society.
Flexible Degree Completion Options
We know that every student is unique, and we want our degrees to reflect that. Depending on your academic and career goals, you can choose either a 1- or 2-year degree track for the M.S. in Biomedical Sciences. If you are looking for a faster way to prepare for medical school or launch your career while saving time and money, our 1-year track is a great option!
What Will You Learn in Our M.S. in Biomedical Sciences Program?
This master’s degree can enhance your understanding of how biology and medicine intertwine. You’ll explore how to use scientific research to make advancements in the healthcare field. Our biomedical sciences courses explore many essential topics, including human genetics, immunology, biochemistry, biostatistics, cell biology, and pathology. Upon graduation, you could potentially pursue a doctoral degree, attend medical school, or advance to higher-level roles in the biomedical industry.
Experience a curriculum taught from a biblical worldview. We believe that integrity is the most important characteristic of any professional, so you will learn how to integrate ethical standards with industry best practices. Liberty’s course in biomedical ethics can help equip you to make moral medical decisions, as well as evaluate the ethicality of various scientific advances.
In this program, you’ll receive a mix of classroom instruction and hands-on lab experience. You will complete several required courses, as well as some electives of your choice. That way, you can tailor your degree to match your interests and career goals. As one of Liberty University’s post-bacc degrees, the M.S. in Biomedical Sciences is designed to help enhance your academic record and equip you to apply to medical school.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information.
Featured Courses
BIOM 503 – Human Genetics
BIOM 600 – Biomedical Ethics
BIOM 610 – Human Neurology and Neuroanatomy
Highlights of Liberty University’s Master’s in Biomedical Sciences Degree Program
At only 39 total credit hours, you can complete this master’s degree in as little as 1 year!
Join Liberty University’s Public Health Student Association (LUPHSA) to receive more professional growth opportunities.
Explore over 20 teaching and research laboratories, including our Health Promotion Lab, Human Performance Lab, Functional Assessment Lab, Athletic Training Lab, and Standardized Patient Center.
Take advantage of our professional-level research equipment, including a gene sequencer, tissue culture facility, fluorescent microscope, LICOR imager, and more.
Participate in exciting research projects and study subjects like algae biofuels, Alzheimer’s disease, cancer, DNA, crayfish parasites, and more!
In this program, you’ll learn from faculty who have years of experience working in academia and the professional world."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/engineering/doctoral/engineering/","Combine Business and Engineering Processes by Earning a Ph.D. in Engineering 
As an experienced engineer, you have so much knowledge to give and the desire to both design and create new products and train the next generation of engineers. Through Liberty University’s Ph.D. in Engineering program, you can gain the technical expertise you desire as well as work on new projects that will contribute to the field of engineering as a whole.
In addition to contributing to engineering and improvements in society, you will also teach a 3-part course progression as a part of your degree completion. This will both develop your teaching skills and help you to prepare future engineers to follow in your footsteps.
If you are interested in advanced fields of engineering, applied physics, materials engineering, material science, and system design, then this Ph.D. in Engineering degree is for you. You can contribute to research, further your career, and collaborate with other engineering professionals as you work together in increasing your skills in business and the engineering process.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) in Engineering Degree?
Our engineering doctoral degree provides you with the chance to develop and establish your credentials as a well-rounded senior engineer. You will gain not only skills in engineering, but you will also increase your teaching ability. Additionally, you will be involved in research projects that will help you gain hands-on experience as you are contributing to the general knowledge base in the field of engineering.
You will also have access to the Center for Engineering Research and Education (CERE) facility where you will be able to work with some of the latest technology and equipment. Throughout this program, you could even gain funding for your research from corporations, national labs, and research labs. With resources like these, you can easily continue your scholarly research.
What Will You Learn in Our Doctor of Philosophy in Engineering Degree?
Our doctorate in engineering bears Liberty’s Dean of Engineering’s philosophy of “Creationeering.” This involves the integration of engineering and business. You will learn design, analysis and synthesis, procurement, logistics, assembly, and many other aspects of the engineering process. In this Ph.D. in Engineering degree program, you will also learn about the business side of the engineering process. Subjects such as human resources, finances, legal, marketing/sales, and management are some of the topics you will learn.
You will also be heavily involved in research. In fact, 50% of your graduate assistantship will be dedicated to research, which will be related to “Simulating Genesis.” This is a project which uses different physics-based phenomena combined with multi-scale modeling capabilities to create a simulation of Genesis events.
You will also present 3 original journal articles and increase your teaching skills through a practicum. You will assist a faculty member in teaching an undergraduate course, then you will teach a course yourself with the faculty member’s help. Finally, you will teach the course alone. So you will experience 3 levels of teaching throughout this program.
In addition to teaching, you will be expected to communicate scholarly contributions in the oral context, so you will complete at least 1 conference presentation. When you have completed this program, you will not only have a Ph.D., but you will also have a number of scholarly accomplishments that will add more value to your résumé. 
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information!
Featured Courses
ENGR 725 – Continuum Mechanics 
ENGR 743 – Damage and Fracture 
Highlights of Our Engineering Doctorate Degree
The School of Engineering plans to host a yearly workshop with other institutions both nationally and internationally in which research progress is promoted and discussed.
You will graduate with 3 original, completed, and published articles.
In addition to publishing, 50% of your graduate assistantship will be dedicated to research.
You will have access to the latest technology and qualified faculty who seek to know you personally and provide you with opportunities for education, research, and training in a Christ-centered environment.
You may have the opportunity to collaborate with local engineering firms on projects that will benefit society.
Liberty University’s Center for Engineering Research and Education (CERE), located in nearby Bedford County, Va., promotes research and development of all forms of energy generation, storage, and transmission."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/masters/","Pursue a Future in Higher Education, Clinical Counseling, and More with Liberty!
Are you excited to continue your studies with a graduate degree program? Do you want to seek career advancement, licensure, or a path to future doctoral studies? Whatever your reason is for furthering your education, we want to help.
All of our behavioral sciences master’s degrees are designed to meet the needs of the respective fields. Become a licensed counselor* in a mental health private practice with our clinical mental health counseling degree. Pursue a career as a researcher or professor with our Master of Science in Psychology.
Looking for a master’s degree but don’t need licensure or certification? We have degrees for that too. Our programs in pastoral counseling and general psychology can be completed in as little as 2 years – faster than the average licensure program.
Partner your aspirations and passions with our level of academic excellence and mission to Train Champions for Christ. Choose Liberty and find the perfect graduate program for your goals!
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
*Individual state licensure requirements may vary, please verify licensure requirements for the state in which you reside.
Available Degree Programs
Clinical Mental Health Counseling (M.A.)
Marriage and Family Counseling (M.A.)
Pastoral Counseling (M.A.)
Psychology (M.S.)
Social Work (M.S.W.)
Why Choose Liberty’s Master’s Degrees in the School of Behavioral Sciences?
From taking the GRE to finding a major that fits your goals perfectly, pursuing a master’s degree can be overwhelming. Let us help. At Liberty, we offer a variety of graduate programs in behavioral sciences, from clinical licensure tracks to doctoral preparation, and a handful of these degrees require just an application to get started, no testing required! It’s time to take your career to the next level. Why wait?
We want to make it easier for you to land your dream job. Our degrees are created around real-world applications taught by professors with years of field experience. You can trust that you are getting a degree that will equip you for the highest caliber in both clinical and non-clinical occupations, as well as for your future academic endeavors.
Study with us residentially to receive more benefits! Some of the major highlights you will experience include the following:
Many of our master’s degrees can be completed in as little as one year.
Our AACC student chapter provides the chance for students like you to grow professionally and spiritually as you network and interact with successful counseling professionals.
Learn how to conduct research and generate reports appropriate for your future behavioral science-related profession.
Our student to professor ratio for residential graduate students is 6:1! Our faculty care deeply for their students, praying for, and with them throughout their academic journey.
Our programs are designed for professionals from all walks of life, not just to help you with career advancement but to help you impact the world and the well-being of others in the spirit of Christian service.
School of Behavioral Sciences Master’s Degree Information
Residential
30-60 total hours depending on specific degree
Transfer up to 50% of your credits
View our course catalog
Admission Requirements for Graduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed on a case-by-case basis, and all applicants must submit the following documents* and meet the minimum requirements for admission:
Admission application
Official bachelor’s degree transcripts with a 2.0 GPA or higher
Self-certification form (for students who are in the final term of their bachelor’s degree)
Current Liberty undergraduate students seeking preliminary acceptance into a graduate program must complete a degree completion application through their ASIST account
*Some degrees may have additional requirements. Review the specific degree page for more information."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/divinity/masters/","Diligently Pursue God’s Calling for Your Life with a Religious Master’s Degree from Liberty 
God’s plan looks different for each of us. You may be called to work overseas as a teacher or missionary to children who have never heard about Jesus. You may be passionate about planting churches around the country. Whatever ministry role you have been called to, we want you to have the tools you need to be sharpened and refined. Liberty’s divinity master’s degrees are designed to help equip you with the training and knowledge you need to be an effective ministry leader.
Our graduate degrees in divinity are led by professors who are still active in research and publishing. We are committed to providing academic excellence founded on the authority of scripture and conservative evangelical theology. As a student with us, you will have opportunities to meet with Christian leaders from all types of organizations, from the Summit Church to Second Baptist Houston. Gain invaluable networks by partnering with a school known for its caliber of religious programs.
Our John W. Rawlings School of Divinity offers extensive resources to students like you. Our 17-story Freedom Tower houses our Scriptorium, various interactive classrooms, and state-of-the-art teaching labs. Additionally, to help ease the burden of fitting classes into busy schedules, we offer classes that meet only once a week. Let us help you free up your schedule as you earn a degree in religious studies. Prepare diligently and make a world of difference wherever you go.
Accreditation
Your divinity degree is approved by the Commission on Accrediting of the Association of Theological Schools (ATS) and has met rigorous accreditation standards. You can feel confident that your degree is both academically excellent and well-respected among churches, ministries, and nonprofit organizations.
Available Degree Programs
Biblical Exposition (M.A.)
Christian Apologetics (M.A.)
Christian Apologetics (Non-Thesis) (M.A.)
Christian Ministry (M.A.)
Master of Divinity (M.Div.)
Theological Studies (M.A.)
Why Choose Liberty’s John W. Rawlings School of Divinity for a Master’s Degree?
Pursue your passion for ministry with Liberty University. Our nonprofit, Christian university provides you with state-of-the-art facilities where you can practice your craft, academic and professional resources, and growth opportunities like no other. With our mission to Train Champions for Christ, we strive to help raise the next generation of Christian leaders to serve with integrity and excellence.
As a graduate divinity student, you will have experienced professors and cutting-edge facilities at your disposal. Study on our campus and receive some of the following benefits:
Learn under professors who are published and advanced in their field as you pursue a degree founded on the authority of Scripture and conservative evangelical theology.
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity is the world’s largest accredited school for religious studies and ministerial training.
Pursue a divinity degree from Liberty to gain internship opportunities with churches and parachurches locally, nationally, and globally.
Our 17-story School of Divinity Freedom Tower contains various classrooms, including a 7-projector immersive classroom, an interactive classroom that utilizes teleconferencing capabilities, and state-of-the-art homiletics teaching lab.
Our Freedom Tower’s Scriptorium houses a $1 million collection of rare books and Bibles donated by the Rawlings family.
Optional Monday-only courses are available for students juggling work, family, studies, and church commitments.
Our graduate ministerial students are eligible for the Keesee Scholarship; check out the applicant requirements to see if you qualify! 
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
As you pursue your degree, you will gain hands-on experience by using the resources in our School of Business building! You will have the opportunity to study in operational information technology labs and network and data centers. Additionally, try your hand at trading stocks in our simulated stock trading room, or in the 2,000-square-foot Entrepreneurship Center for Innovation.
You also have the opportunity to get involved with our student organizations and honor societies. From our Accounting Society to our Technology & Engineering Club, you will gain invaluable insight from peers and professionals alike! Some of the other opportunities you will find in our School of Business include:
Over 25 areas of study.
3+1 accelerated business degrees, so you can walk away with your bachelor’s and master’s degree in just 4 years!
Center for Entrepreneurship
Center for Cyber Security
Business internships
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity Master’s Degree Information
Residential
36-93 total credit hours
Transfer in up to 50% of your credits
View our course catalog"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/arts-and-sciences/masters/english/","Strengthen Your Research and Communication Skills with an English Master’s Degree from Liberty University
If you want the flexibility to pursue a wide variety of careers, Liberty University’s Master of Arts (MA) in English degree may be right for you! Our program can help you develop skills that are essential in almost every profession. In addition to strengthening your understanding of literary texts and the English language, you can hone your skills in research, writing, critical thinking, and analysis.
Knowing how to write and communicate effectively can help you thrive in many different fields — from business and marketing to government work and teaching. With an English master’s degree, you don’t have to limit yourself to only a few job opportunities — you can explore your interests and develop essential skills that can help boost your marketability across various industries.
If you have a love for literature and a desire to write well, Liberty’s MA in English is a great next step to take in your academic journey. Whether you’re looking to prepare for a terminal degree program, launch a new career path, or simply dive into the subjects you’re most passionate about, our English master’s program can help you pursue your goals. Partner with us and see how far a master’s degree in English can take you!
Complete 36 credits (12 classes) while earning your degree
Finish this program in just 2 years and start pursuing your career goals
Transfer in up to 50% of the total credits required for this degree
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s English Master’s Program?
A master’s degree in English can help open the door to many different types of careers. As you study, you can strengthen your writing abilities and your knowledge of literature as well as develop soft skills that can transfer to other fields. And, by researching and writing about a work of literature and defending it in a classroom in front of like-minded peers, you can learn how to craft persuasive, logical arguments — a skill that may serve you well in your future endeavors.
We’ve designed our master’s degree in English with your success in mind and are committed to helping you grow professionally. To fulfill this goal, we offer the opportunity for students in our English master’s program to become Graduate Student Assistants (GSAs) and serve in academic support roles across various university departments.
In keeping with our mission to Train Champions for Christ, Liberty University’s GSA program selects graduate students who are committed to Christ, their academic studies, and their own professional and spiritual development. Working as a GSA is a great way to develop your teaching skills while providing valuable assistance to professors and students alike.
We also offer the opportunity to join Liberty’s chapter of Sigma Tau Delta, the International Honor Society in English. As a member, you can connect with other students who share your interests and thus expand your professional network. Additionally, our literary journal Lamp provides the chance for you to submit your poetry, fiction, creative nonfiction, or art/photography for publication. Throughout the English master’s program, you’ll study under professors who are well-versed in their field and committed to helping you succeed.
Frequently Asked Questions
What can you do with a master’s in English?
Is a master’s in English the same as a master’s in English literature?
How much can you make with a Master of Arts in English?
What Will You Learn in Our Master’s in English Degree Program?
Our Master of Arts in English provides extensive and well-rounded training in literature, research methods, writing, and literary theory. Through this degree, you can learn how to analyze and interpret literature in a manner consistent with a biblical worldview. This can help sharpen your analytical skills and hone your ability to present a logical defense for your thoughts. Additionally, you can gain advanced research skills and explore proper methods for citing your work.
In this program, you’ll have the opportunity to study well-known literary texts from throughout history. You can choose from a wide array of courses in literature, including British, world, Christian, African American, contemporary/postmodern, and American literature. By writing and defending a thesis, you can contribute to the base of knowledge in your field and dive deeper into a topic of interest.
In addition to reading and analyzing numerous works of literature, you can hone your writing skills, explore the linguistic characteristics of English throughout its history, and learn best practices for analyzing texts. Upon graduation, you could continue your studies at the doctoral level, potentially teach English literature and writing at colleges and universities, or pursue jobs that require professional writing skills.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information about what you’ll be studying.
Featured Courses
ENGL 501 – Christian Poetics
ENGL 503 – Bibliography and Research
ENGL 505 – Advanced Literary Criticism
ENGL 656 – Studies in World Literatures
Highlights of Liberty University’s Master’s Degree in English
You will learn from experienced professors who are well-published in the field and who care about you as an individual.
As a Liberty student, you may have opportunities to showcase your work at conferences around the country.
Our chapter of Sigma Tau Delta, an international honor society dedicated to fostering literacy and all aspects of the discipline of English, provides professional development opportunities.
You can pursue opportunities to publish your work in our literary journal Lamp.
You can gain valuable teaching experience as a Graduate Student Assistant.
1Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Editors (viewed online Oct. 27, 2021). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/masters/exercise-science-and-wellness/","Demonstrate Your Expertise and Advance Your Career with Liberty’s Exercise Science and Wellness Degree
Whether you are seeking to prepare for doctoral studies, advance in your current profession, or become more equipped for your dream job, Liberty can help! Our Master of Science in Exercise Science and Wellness is designed with your success in mind.
Your master’s degree should require more than classroom lectures and midterm essays. At Liberty, we want to challenge you so you can walk away confident as you pursue your next goal. Your college experience can be greatly enhanced by our teaching and research laboratories where your knowledge can come to life. Learn hands-on with the latest industry equipment so you can stand out to future employers.
Wherever you want your degree to take you, we want to be a part of the journey. Our expert faculty will come alongside you, mentoring and praying with you throughout your studies. To fulfill our mission of Training Champions for Christ, we seek to provide an education that is rooted in industry best practices and Christian integrity. Stand out as a leader in your industry with a degree in exercise science from Liberty.

Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Exercise Science and Wellness Master’s Degree?
We understand the necessity of graduate work that is both fulfilling and rigorous. Liberty’s master’s in exercise physiology degree can provide you with industry-standard equipment and resources so you can develop the knowledge, skills, and confidence to stand out in the competitive field of exercise science. Many exercise physiology programs don’t offer the same level of support that Liberty does. Our professors not only have terminal degrees in their respective areas of study – they also have a desire to get to know you, pray for you, and mentor you as you pursue your master’s in exercise science and wellness.
As a graduate student in our exercise science and wellness degree, you can grow with hands-on experience through the following means:
Get practical, first-hand use of over 20 research and teaching labs, including our Human Performance Lab, Functional Assessment Lab, and Standardized Patient Center.
Utilize the Human Performance Laboratory and the Biomechanics & Motion Analysis Lab, which provide over 8,000 square feet of workspace with state-of-the-art industry equipment.
Our Functional Assessment Laboratory is outfitted with a variety of functional assessments, strength training, and agility equipment.
Our Athletic Training Lab serves as a classroom and laboratory for clinical and didactical instruction related to learning athletic training competencies and skills.
Our Standardized Patient Center will allow you to practice your clinical skills and receive feedback from faculty in our athletic training work-study program prior to taking your practical.
Your practical exams will be acted out in a realistic clinical learning environment that simulates real-world conditions. One of our classrooms has an AstroTurf floor to better simulate on-field evaluations!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/communication-and-the-arts/masters/","Pursue a Master’s Degree That Leads to More Career Opportunities Than Ever Before
Do you long to turn your works of art into a rewarding career in studio arts or graphic and digital design? Does a career in social media marketing, speech writing, or public speaking sound exciting to you? If the answer to either of these questions is “yes,” then pursuing a master’s degree might be your next step. Whether your dream is to become a graphic designer, illustrator, art critic, journalist, or public relations professional, Liberty has a graduate program for you. Our master’s degrees in communication and the arts are designed for students who want to become leaders in their industry.
You deserve a job you love that’s rewarding, challenging, and exciting. Choosing a path in communication or the arts is a great way to prepare for a huge variety of occupations on the cutting-edge of technology. Our professors are here to develop your skills and mentor you in your path to a successful career.
Available Degree Programs
Communication (M.A.)
Professional Communication (M.A.)
Strategic Communication – Digital Communication (M.A.)
Master of Fine Arts (MFA)
Why Choose a Master’s Degree from Liberty’s School of Communication and the Arts?
By earning a master’s degree in communication and the arts, you can be better prepared for a career in graphic design, strategic communication, and more. Set yourself apart in the competitive digital design industry with an MFA, the highest academic achievement an artist can obtain. Get the recognition your work deserves while opening the door to more lucrative positions with Liberty’s Communication and the Arts master’s degrees.
Some of the major resources that will be at your disposal as one of Liberty’s Communication and the Arts graduate students include:
We have over $1 million in award-winning campus media opportunities and state-of-the-art equipment.
Discover opportunities for professional development by working with our radio station the Liberty Flames Sports Network (LFSN), our radio station, the Liberty Champion newspaper, live streaming, and television productions.
Become a member of the Public Relations Student Society of America (PRSSA), our advertising team, and/or Innovations PR, Liberty’s student-run public relations firm, to add real-world experience to your résumé.
Learn how to manipulate designs using character creation, 3D modeling, and virtual reality. Our students are creating projects that they can show future employers to prove their skill level.
Follow in the footsteps of some of our students such as Carla Miles, an alumna who has gone on to submit design work for Magnolia Hearth and Hand’s Target collection.
Now it’s your turn. Let us help cultivate your current artistic talent so you can take your skill to the next level. Let our professional faculty come alongside you to bring your career aspirations to life. Join our student body and see all the opportunities waiting for you. 
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Degree Information
Residential format
Transfer in up to 50% of your credits
View our course catalog"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/masters/","Grow Your Ministry Potential with a Master’s Degree in Music from Liberty University
You have been looking for the next step. Where will you go from here? Do you want to work in a school or collegiate setting, investing your love of music into the next generation of musicians? Or do you prefer the stage, where you can feel God’s presence as you sing and lead others around you to worship? If either of these paths excites you, consider Liberty’s School of Music master’s degrees!
At Liberty, we offer a variety of graduate degrees in music to better target the needs of our growing student population. Our master’s degree in music education is designed to train students who wish to teach music in elementary, secondary, and collegiate school settings. We also have a music and worship master’s degree, as well as a program focused on worship studies specifically.
Whether you are looking for a graduate program to advance your current career in worship ministry, gain specific credentials, or to start fresh in the field of professional worship, we have a degree for you. Bring your passion for music to a school dedicated to seeing God glorified through it. We want to help you achieve your career goals in music, so let us help you take your next step. Check out our residential music master’s degrees below to find the best match for your unique aspirations.
Available Degree Programs
Music and Worship (M.A.)
Music Education (M.A.)
Worship Studies (M.A.)
Why Choose Liberty’s School of Music Master’s Degree?
Continue your music education with a school dedicated to your success. Partner with Liberty’s resources, mentors, and opportunities, so we can help orchestrate your skills and passions, putting you on track for the career you have been called to! So what makes our School of Music stand out?
High Marks across the Board
Nearly a 100% job placement rate for our recent residential graduate students.
141,000-square-foot Center for Worship has been voted “Best of the Best in Higher Education” six years in a row by Worship Leader Magazine.
Designated as an “All Steinway” school.
Liberty University is an accredited institutional member of the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM) and is regionally accredited by SACSCOC.
School of Music was rated #1 Christian Music School by Christian Universities Online.
One of the nation’s largest music schools.
Our students have produced albums that have been nominated for awards with Liberty alumni going on to become Dove award-winning Christian artists and songwriters.
Professional Resources You Can Count on to Develop Your Talent
We offer exceptional opportunities for our students including our 2.2 million dollar state-of-the-art recording studio and songwriting labs. In partnership with the Michael W. Smith Center for Commercial Music, students also have the opportunity to have their original music published before they graduate!
The Center for Music and the Worship Arts building, which contains a 1,600 seat concert hall, state-of-the-art lighting and audio technology, various rehearsal halls and classrooms, and two state-of-the-art Mac labs.
44 full-time faculty with degrees from many of the most prestigious music schools in the nation.
Opportunities to Take Your Skills to the Next Level
Our students compete in state and regional competitions, perform at events such as the ACDA National Convention and Inaugural Prayer Service, and produce albums that have been nominated for various awards.
Partnering with our facilities, resources, and experienced faculty, our alumni have gone on to become Dove award-winning Christian artists and songwriters.
You deserve to fine-tune your musical ability and worship skills with the best industry equipment under the most experienced mentors. We believe we have what you need to succeed in the competitive field of music. Let our award-winning facilities, students, and professors invest in you, so you can achieve more than you ever dreamed possible.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
School of Music Master’s Degree Information
Residential format
39-42 total credit hours
Transfer up to 50% of your credits
View our course catalog
Admission Requirements for Graduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed on a case-by-case basis, and all applicants must submit the following documents and meet the minimum requirements* for admission:"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/divinity/masters/global-studies/","Engage the World with a Master of Arts in Global Studies
With our Master of Arts in Global Studies, you can propel your career forward and upward. We want to equip you with the knowledge and skills you need to build relationships, start your own nonprofit organization, or do global relief work. Whatever your calling in the global market is, our global studies degree can help you get there so you can take your work abroad.
We understand that you have passions. You’re passionate about God’s work in the world. That’s why our M.A. in Global Studies is perfect for you. Throughout this degree, you’ll get in-depth knowledge of contextualization as well as learn the intercultural communication skills that will help you both in your professional and personal life.
So what are you waiting for? We know you want to jumpstart your career in working with people from diverse cultures and backgrounds, and we want to help you live out your calling. Our purpose is to help you get one major step closer to fulfilling your calling in life and develop your skills in cross-cultural service. 
Accreditation
Your divinity degree is approved by the Commission on Accrediting of the Association of Theological Schools (ATS) and has met rigorous accreditation standards. You can feel confident that your degree is both academically excellent and well-respected among churches, ministries, and nonprofit organizations.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s M.A. in Global Studies?
Pursuing an M.A. in Global Studies is a unique and exciting opportunity for you to prepare for a career of intercultural interaction in local and global contexts. You’ll get the chance to learn from professionals in the field and challenge your academic fortitude, as well as have access to incredible resources and state-of-the-art facilities where you can develop your cross-cultural skills.
One of the best things about our residential master’s in global studies is the professors. These men and women are professionals in their field with years of professional global service. All faculty have doctorates in global fields and substantial experience abroad. They are excited about investing in the next generation of global workers. They are excited about investing in the next generation of global workers through academic and experiential training.
A key part of this degree is the required cross-cultural internship in which you apply what you are learning. Additionally, you’ll get to experience our immersive and interactive classrooms, which allow global leaders around the world to lecture and interact in your classes from their field location.
What Will You Learn in Our M.A. in Global Studies?
As a global leader, you need to be equipped with a strong foundation in theory and in practice. Our M.A. in Global Studies degree provides you the strong practical application that you need to excel in your intercultural interactions. The skills and knowledge you obtain while obtaining our master’s in global studies will be invaluable in many settings such as business, nonprofit organizations and more.
Your global studies degree will provide insight into cultural and global engagement with the following courses:
Cultural Anthropology
Global Studies Survey
Contextualization
Orality: The Power of Story
World Religions
Intercultural Communication
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information!
Featured Courses
GLST 500 – Global Studies Survey
GLST 525 – Introduction to Islam
GLST 600 – Cultural Anthropology
GLST 655 – Orality: The Power of Story
Highlights of Our M.A. in Global Studies Degree
Receive training in Cultural Intelligence ©.
You have the option to include a thesis in this degree in place of open electives.
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity professors are active in the classroom, as well as in research and publishing, and continuing global involvement.
Our Global Studies professors are committed to communicating with people of all nations and cultures.
Internship opportunities with churches and parachurches locally, nationally, and globally.
Our Global Studies degree has three graduate electives that can be in any discipline such as business, public health, international relations, and more."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/masters/psychology/","Make an Impact on the Lives of Others with a Master’s in Psychology from Liberty
Are you interested in learning more about what motivates people spiritually, socially, and occupationally? Do you enjoy analyzing how people think and react to different situations? Maybe you’re in search of a college or university that offers you the chance to learn about psychology from a business perspective, or maybe you’d like to pursue graduate studies in hopes of working in the psychology field someday. If so, a master’s in psychology from Liberty University could be a great way for you to pursue a rewarding, lifelong career! 
Liberty University offers 2 residential graduate programs in psychology. The first option is an MS in Psychology – General Psychology, which covers topics like social and cognitive psychology as well as conditioning, learning, and neuropsychology. The second option is an MS in Psychology – Industrial/Organizational Psychology, which covers topics like organizational behavior management, leadership theories and practice, and current issues in industrial/organizational psychology.
The goal of both master’s in psychology programs at Liberty is to help make you a versatile, knowledgeable professional who is skilled in a number of areas. From research analysis and program development to college instruction and workforce management, a master’s degree in psychology from Liberty can help you prepare for the career path you’re most interested in. 
Both of our master’s in psychology programs can also prepare you to pursue doctoral studies in the future. Wherever your career goals are leading you, prepare by earning your graduate psychology degree from Liberty — a university that is dedicated to your personal and professional success.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose One of Liberty’s Psychology Degrees?
Pursuing a master’s degree is a great way to take your specific skill set and interests to the next level, so you can land a career in a field that will be uniquely rewarding for you! Our psychology master’s programs provide courses with the highest academic rigor without ethical compromise. At Liberty, our master’s in psychology are taught by professors with real-world field experience using curriculum founded on strong biblical principles.
As a nonprofit Christian university, our mission is to Train Champions for Christ. We integrate the Christian faith into the training you receive in industry-standard psychological science. Walk away with a degree that expands your understanding of scientific methods and procedures.
We believe your interests can be turned into a God-honoring career in the field of psychology. Stand out to employers for your integrity and level of academic prowess. Let us help you get there!
What Will You Learn in Our Master of Science in Psychology – General Psychology Degree?
Our MS in general psychology program provides foundational training in statistics, research design, and mental health, as well as an overview of social, cognitive, and clinical psychology. Our classes examine measurement issues, research ethics, and correlation and regression.
The general psychology program offers you the opportunity to select 6 elective courses of your choosing — allowing you to gain more specific training in areas that interest you the most. Additionally, our general psychology specialization allows you to develop a deep understanding of psychology.
The industrial/organizational psychology program also allows you to take 3 elective courses related to psychology. You’ll also take courses that cover the foundations of i/o psychology, organizational behavior management, current issues in i/o psychology, and leadership theories and practice. 
Check out our featured courses below for more information about the type of classes you will be taking!
Featured Courses
MSPS 500 – Statistics and Research Design I
MSPS 513 – Social Psychology
MSPS 521 – Psychology and Christianity Integration
MSPS 531 – Cognitive Psychology: Theories and Methodology
General Psychology
Industrial/Organizational Psychology"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/masters/public-health/","Fight Diseases and Save Lives with Liberty’s Master’s in Public Health
Are you interested in leading the fight against sickness and disease? Perhaps your dream job is at a public health organization, but you aren’t looking to become a doctor or a nurse. If that sounds like you, Liberty’s Master of Public Health may be for you.
We offer a master’s degree in public health to prepare students like you to change the world. At Liberty, we Train Champions for Christ — principled leaders in disease prevention, servants to underserved communities, experts in molecular biology, and Christ-centered public health professionals who are pioneers in their field.
Choose a school of public health that has your success in mind. Choose Liberty University.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Pursue a Master’s in Public Health at Liberty?
As an MPH student, you are able to choose a specialization for additional training in an area of your choice. Liberty’s public health master’s program offers specializations in epidemiology, global health, health promotion, and nutrition. 
If you have a passion for helping people change their dietary habits, the nutrition area of study can help. The global health specialization can help you engage people from different cultures. Should you have a passion for teaching health and human wellness, the health promotion specialization may be for you. If you want to study and master infectious diseases, our epidemiology specialization is an excellent choice.
Whatever you dream of doing with your degree, we want to help you each step of the way. Choose Liberty’s Master of Public Health graduate program and turn your dream of becoming a public health leader into a reality.
Liberty University has one of the largest accredited MPH programs in the U.S.
Our Council on Education for Public Health (CEPH) accreditation means that this degree can help you pursue jobs in local government, federal government, and the military.
We offer classes with extensive hands-on fieldwork led directly by faculty.
Receive personal attention as you develop your professionalism and mathematical competency.
Gain a broad perspective of the health field with coursework from a variety of health-related disciplines.
Complete a 120-hour practicum at the end of your program, so you can practice learned skills and interact with health professionals.
Utilize departmental tablets loaded with analytical tools for research and residential coursework.
Access classrooms and distant education rooms equipped with camera/video capture technology, models, and testing materials.
Pursue research opportunities of all kinds, including our ongoing real-world projects among the underserved of Lynchburg, with Hope of Life in Guatemala, and among the Mixteco in Richmond.
You are standing before a door of opportunity that can lead to a successful public health career. Partner with us and open the door. It’s time to improve the health of populations around the world and be a part of something bigger at Liberty.
What Will You Learn in Our MPH Degree?
Develop the skills you’ll need for a successful career in public health! Our MPH degree focuses on the foundational concepts of administration, biostatistics, environmental health, epidemiology, research methods in the field, and social and behavioral theories in public health. Overall, this program can help you develop strong research and critical thinking skills that you can take with you into any health setting.
By choosing a specialization, you’ll focus your studies on an area that most interests you and fits your career goals. Our specializations include epidemiology, global health, health promotion, and nutrition.
Check out our featured courses below for more information!
Featured Courses
HLTH 503 – Principles of Epidemiology
HLTH 505 – Principles of Environmental Health
HLTH 507 – Public Health Administration
Epidemiology 
Global Health
Community Health Promotion
Nutrition
B.S. to MPH (4+1 Track)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/government/masters/public-policy/","Prepare to Serve the Public with Honor
Are you currently working in public service or thinking of transitioning to this career field? Our Helms School of Government offers the opportunity to prepare for a rewarding career in public service by earning a Master of Arts in Public Policy. Through this degree program, you will pursue graduate-level training that is designed to “impact the world” by developing Christ-centered alumni who are political leaders, scholars, and policymakers. You will learn how to shape policy in governmental, legislative, political, communications, managerial, and academic areas.
Our experienced professors will guide you in qualitative and quantitative research on issues affecting local governmental organizations, international organizations, private entities, and local legislative bodies. You will understand the impact of existing or proposed public policies on individuals, institutions, and American society. Your studies will ensure that you have the skills to shape public policy and be a positive force in the field of public service.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Master of Arts in Public Policy Degree?
If you want to further your knowledge and training in the areas of public policy, then Liberty University is the place to pursue your master’s degree in public policy. We are located in Central Virginia, which makes working with organizations and businesses in Washington D.C. a reality due to our close proximity.
It is our goal to provide opportunities for first-hand learning experiences. Our leadership believes that knowledge is best turned into wisdom through practical learning. If you major in a government-related degree, you have the opportunity to join the only honor society for college and university government students in the United States. Pi Sigma Alpha, the National Political Science Honor Society, is a member of the Association of College Honor Societies.
What Will You Learn in Our Master of Arts in Public Policy Degree?
Our Master of Arts in Public Policy will prepare you for public service through a variety of courses that focus on different aspects of public policy and governmental leadership. You will gain an understanding of the effects of economics on public policy and how the government can, in turn, affect our economy. Being aware of the ramifications of laws and rules put in place by the government is key in having a positive influence on society. Throughout this degree, you will study influential political philosophers and how their ideas have influenced the country.
The Helms School of Government has a mission to produce leaders who can affect the nation in both a positive and profound way. You will learn the principles of servant leadership and be able to get some practical experience as well in order to further your understanding of the course content. You will study the most influential political philosophers and how their ideas influenced the country we have today.
You will study the role of America in global issues and how to determine sovereignty when it comes to international organizations that seek to have an influence on American policy both at home and abroad. Additionally, you will look at the influence Christianity has on the world and how we can negotiate competing worldviews with diplomacy and authority.
Featured Courses
PPOG 502 – Economics and Public Policy
PPOG 503 – Political Philosophy
PPOG 504 – Leadership, Statesmanship, and Governance 
PPOG 506 – Intro to Geopolitics and International Diplomacy
Highlights of the Helms School of Government Degree Programs
There are many opportunities to intern with organizations and agencies related to your degree thanks to the special relationship and proximity to Washington, D.C.
Join the only honor society for college and university government students in the United States. Pi Sigma Alpha, the National Political Science Honor Society, is a member of the Association of College Honor Societies.
Our Helms School of Government, named after Sen. Jesse Helms, was founded to promote the traditional values and conservative thoughts of our namesake.
Advocate for public policy, enact it, implement it or enforce it. Our Helms School of Government offers the chance to study and fill one or more of these roles with our wide range of degrees."
"https://www.liberty.edu/students/community-life/care-team/","CARE and Support
Bridge the gap between those who need support and those who can help
What you see or know about is important to us.
Be a bridge builder and help connect our university community by reaching out when you notice something out of the ordinary or are concerned for the well-being of yourself or other community members.
CARE and Support bridges the gap between those who need support and those who can help by assessing specific needs, collaborating with university and community resources, and empowering individual success.
You are expected to notify LUPD at (434) 592-3911 if you observe or become aware of immediately threatening or concerning behaviors.
Why Contact CARE and Support?
CARE and Support relies on the observations, interactions, and unique community of Liberty University students, faculty, and staff to ensure no concerns go unnoticed. By making a referral, you are helping individuals get the opportunity to receive access to beneficial resources.
(Outside of the Liberty University community? Email: CARE@liberty.edu.)
Make a Referral
CARE Referrals are reviewed Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. – 4:30 p.m.
Reasons to Refer:
Threat to self/others
Mental/emotional distress
Poor self-care habits
Spiritual needs
Additional indicators"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/aeronautics/associate/","Gain the Professional Skills You Need through Our Aviation Associate Degrees!
Earn your associate degree from a university that is renowned for its Christian foundation and academic excellence, while training for your dream career in aviation by using state-of-the-art aeronautic equipment!
There is a growing need for aircraft mechanics. To meet this need, we offer an associate degree program focused on training aircraft mechanics.
By earning an associate degree, you can seamlessly transition to one of our bachelor’s degree programs, such as our B.S. in Aviation Maintenance. Throughout your degree, the professors in the School of Aeronautics will encourage and equip you each step of the way, from 2-year to 4-year degree tracks. Earn your associate degree with Liberty University and join the next generation of aviation professionals filling these exciting positions.

Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Available Degree Programs
Associate of Arts in Aviation Maintenance Technology
Aviation Maintenance Technician Certificate
Why Choose Liberty’s Aeronautics Associate Degrees?
There has never been a better time to start your career in aviation! Within the next 20 years worldwide, there will be a need for more than 640,000 new aircraft mechanics for airlines, manufacturers, and service stations. Stand out to companies and airlines alike with an associate degree from a nonprofit, Christian university that stands behind quality education for and ethical leadership in its graduates.
Liberty University’s aeronautics associate degrees will prepare you for exciting opportunities in the growing field of aeronautics, and incorporate innovative equipment and collegiate curriculum so that you are prepared with the training and credentials you need for success in your career. Enhanced by our mission to Train Champions for Christ, all of our degree programs provide training with a biblical worldview in mind.
Liberty School of Aeronautics student working on aircraft.
School of Aeronautics Associate Degree Information
Residential degree
Total Credit Hours 
Aviation Maintenance Technology degree: 83-92 credits
Transfer in up to 75% of the degree
Review our Course Catalog
Admission Requirements for Undergraduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/casas/associate/","Train for Technical Excellence with Liberty’s CASAS Associate Degree
Are you ready for an exciting hands-on career in your dream trade? Let us help! Whether you are looking to become a certified HVAC technician, plumber, carpenter, or even a welder, we have an associate degree that will help make your career goals a reality.
We partner with Virginia Technical Institute (VTI), located just 30 minutes from Liberty’s campus so that our College of Applied Studies and Academic Success (CASAS) students have the best industry equipment to practice their skill on. We provide students with transportation to VTI, so you have one less thing to worry about.
Additionally, since you will take general education courses on our campus, you will walk away not only certified in your trade but with an associate degree as well. This provides you with more career opportunities and 65 credits to put towards a bachelor’s degree!
Partner your technical passions with Liberty’s associate degree focusing on proper trade training. It’s time to advance your career and prepare for a successful tomorrow.
Read More
Available CASAS Degree Program
Technical Studies (AAS)
Our Associate of Applied Science in Technical Studies will provide you with technical coursework and general education courses to prepare you for trade work as a carpenter, electrician, HVAC technician, plumber, or welder.
View the Degree Completion Plan to see what type of courses you will study in the program!
Why Choose Liberty’s CASAS Associate Degrees?
Earn an associate degree from a school that wants to take your skills further! We are excited to offer programs that will equip you for your specific career goals. If you are looking to work in fields like carpentry, HVAC, and plumbing, let us come alongside you to provide the tools you need to succeed.
Some of the features and benefits of pursuing one of our CASAS associate degrees include:
Transportation provided to Virginia Technical Institute’s (VTI) state of the art training facilities so you can complete your trade specific courses. All your general education requirements can be completed on Liberty’s campus!
Specific credentials for students completing our trade and craft courses, including OSHA 10 and the National Center for Construction Education and Research (NCCER)
Minors that prepare you for your specific career path! You can choose carpentry, electrical, HVAC, plumbing, or welding.
Courses focused on skill development needed to be a craft worker or technician in today’s construction industry.
Courses that teach you vital on the job safety and first aid procedures.
Admission Requirements for Undergraduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received.
CASAS Associate Degree Information
Residential format
Total credit hours: 65
Transfer in up to 75% of your total degree
Check out our course catalog"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/arts-and-sciences/associate/","Chart Your Own Course with an Associate Degree from Our College of Arts and Sciences
An associate degree is an excellent option if you want to pursue an education quickly and cost-effectively. Associate degrees can provide the credentials you need to gain entry into the workforce or career field of your choice, seek a higher or more competitive salary, or as a way to prepare for a four-year bachelor’s degree. And when you earn your associate degree from Liberty, you’ll receive a quality education from professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and have real-world experience in their field.
Our College of Arts and Sciences offers the chance to earn an associate degree that will not only launch your experience in higher education but also allow you to follow your passion and design a degree that is unique to you.
Available Arts and Sciences Associate Degrees
History (A.A.)
Interdisciplinary Studies (A.A.)
STEM – Mathematics (A.S.)

Why Choose Liberty’s College of Arts and Sciences Associate Degrees?
At Liberty University, you will get an education that is taught from a Christian worldview by professors who have doctoral degrees in their fields and years of real-life experience.
You will build friendships that will last a lifetime as you meet students from all 50 states and over 70 different countries.
Our sprawling campus is located in beautiful Central Virginia and features opportunities to enjoy activities outside of classes and studying. From our NCAA sports teams to our recreation centers like Snowflex, the LaHaye Ice Center, and Hydaway Outdoor Center, you are sure to find something to your taste.
Speaking of taste, you can also enjoy our Reber-Thomas Food Court with over 20 available food stations, including delicious gluten-free and vegan options.
Admission Requirements for Undergraduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
All applicants must submit the following:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received.
Degree Information
Residential
60 total credit hours
Transfer in up to 75% of the degree total
Review our course catalog"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/government/associate/","Practice Servant Leadership with an Associate Degree from Helms School of Government 
Pursuing an associate degree is an excellent option if you need a college degree in a shorter amount of time than a four-year bachelor’s degree program offers. You can use an associate degree to enter the workforce at a higher salary, in a position that requires a degree, or as a chance to prepare for a four-year bachelor’s degree.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, someone with an associate degree earns on average almost $120 more a week than someone with just a high school diploma does. Start your educational journey to a career that is meaningful to you as you use your associate degree to serve your community and reach your goals.
Through our School of Government, you can pursue either a criminal justice degree or government degree. If you decide to pursue a bachelor’s degree, you can transfer the credits from your associate degree to continue either online or residentially.
Available Government Associate Degree Programs
Criminal Justice (A.A.)
Government (A.A.)
Why Choose Liberty’s Helms School of Government Associate Degree Programs?
Our Helms School of Government, named after Senator Jesse Helms, was founded to promote the traditional values and conservative thoughts of our namesake.
Get your associate degree in government or criminal justice in less than two years.
At Liberty University, you will get an education that is taught from a Christian worldview by professors who have doctoral degrees in their fields and years of real-life experience.
Build friendships that will last a lifetime as you meet students from all 50 states and over 70 different countries.
Learn to think critically and be guided by duty, honor, and morality.
Admission Requirements for Undergraduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
All applicants must submit the following:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received.
Associate Degree Information
Residential
61 total credit hours
Transfer in up to 75% of total degree
Review our course catalog"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/academics/career-center/fellowships/","Intern in Washington, D.C.
Ever wondered what it would be like to live in Washington D.C.? As a Liberty student, you can experience this amazing city through one of our unique and prestigious internships.
Enjoy the political energy of Capitol Hill by participating in one of our fellowships. You’ll get college credit, work experience, and an exclusive, exciting opportunity all in one semester.
Ready to take the first step to join Liberty?
Apply NowRequest Info
Washington Fellowship
Work in the energetic atmosphere of our nation’s capital through the Washington Fellowship.
Experience historical downtown housing, professional development, and networking events while gaining career experience.
This program has placed students in organizations such as the National Park Service, American Psychological Association, Metro Police Department, and U.S. Congress.
“We are in a unique position to make a real difference in our nation’s capital, and it has been so exciting to be a part of it!”
– Shandra, Student
“I am so happy that Liberty offers this opportunity, and I am thrilled that I took part in it.”
– Mike, Student
“The Washington Fellowship is a fantastic program. The past four months have provided me with the opportunity to grow professionally as well as spiritually.”
– Kenlyn, Student
“I never would have gotten the job [Office of Investigations at USAID’s OIG] if it weren’t for the Washington Fellowship and I’m very thankful for the opportunity we all had to complete the program.”
– Carly, Student
Schedule an Appointment
Application and Requirements
Contact Information"
"https://www.liberty.edu/prechatform/?dept=ResidentINTL","We're sorry we missed you! Our offices are currently closed. Please see below for office hours and additional contact information.
residential international Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat & Sun: Closed
Back to Contacts"
"https://www.liberty.edu/prechatform/?dept=ResidentGrad","We're sorry we missed you! Our offices are currently closed. Please see below for office hours and additional contact information.
residential graduate Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat: 10:00AM - 6:00PM EST
Sun: Closed
Our Admissions Office is available by phone at (877) 298-9617, Mon, Tues, Thurs, and Fri from 10:00AM to 9:00PM EST, Wed from 9:00AM to 6:00PM EST, and Sat 10:00AM to 6:00PM EST. You can also email us at residentgraduate@liberty.edu."
"https://www.liberty.edu/career-services/career-events/","Career Events
Make the Most Out of a Every Career Event
Career Services offers a wide variety of events from school to specific walk-in hours with career coaches to large career fairs. These events are open to Liberty University students and alumni.
Click on the list below to view the many different events hosted by Career Services. This is list is frequently updated with the latest events both on-campus & virtual.
Career Coach Walk-In Hours
For all other Fairs, Experience Events and On Campus Recruitment opportunities, go to Liberty.JoinHandshake.com for complete and up-to-date details."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/virtual-experiences-at-lu/campus-videos/","Learn about campus landmarks and amenities from the people who use them every day – our students!
Dorms
Campus East
Liberty Mountain Campus East provides on-campus apartment-style living. Each unit offers free laundry, private bathrooms, and a shared kitchen and living room. Plus, Campus East residents enjoy easy access to David’s Place fitness facility and several dining options.
Residential Commons
Our newest residence halls, the Residential Commons, offer centrally-located, hotel-style living. Residents enjoy private bathrooms, generous closet space, and co-ed meeting rooms and a laundry room on every floor.
The Hill
Enjoy the largest rooms on campus, outdoor fire pits, and newly-renovated facilities on the Hill. Located right next to the student union and the dining hall, the Hill is perfect for any student who values convenience.
Athletics
Intramural Fields
Relive your favorite high school sports or cheer on your friends with Intramural Sports. Choose from 20+ sports like beach volleyball, soccer, and basketball to reduce stress and stay healthy!
LaHaye Recreation and Fitness Center
Take a group exercise class, get your heart pumping, lift some weights, or enjoy a game of pickup basketball at our state-of-the-art fitness center. With facilities like a 25-meter pool, basketball courts, and a rock wall, you’re sure to find an activity you love.
Natatorium
Cheer on our Swimming & Diving teams at our 75,000-square-foot aquatics facility! With seating for more than 1,400 spectators, you’ll enjoy watching races, dives, and triathlons.
The Liberty Arena
The Liberty Arena — a 4,000-seat, 125,000-square-foot facility that opened in 2020 — is home to Liberty volleyball and men’s and women’s basketball. This arena provides Flames fans with an exciting, intimate atmosphere and a front-row seat to all the action.
Williams Stadium
Williams Stadium is home to our NCAA Division I football team! In 2018, a stadium expansion brought the capacity to 25,000, giving fans plenty of space to cheer on the Flames. The stadium also hosts our annual Commencement exercises.
Colleges and Schools
Center for Natural Sciences
Conduct research in one of our Center for Natural Sciences’ six research labs using professional equipment like a gene sequencer, fluorescent microscope, and more! This 135,000-square-foot building also includes a 300-seat lecture hall and plenty of space for quiet study.
Freedom Tower
The Freedom Tower houses our John W. Rawlings School of Divinity, the world’s largest school for religious studies and ministerial training. Enjoy a 360-degree view of campus from the top floor or check out a collection of rare books and Bibles in the Rawlings Scriptorium Museum.
School of Business
Our newest academic building – the School of Business – features a stock trading simulation room and other high-tech resources for future business leaders. Develop a business idea with help from our Center for Entrepreneurship or sharpen your boardroom presentation skills in one of the building’s many conference rooms.
School of Music
Hone your craft or enjoy a concert in one of the nation’s largest schools of music. Our All-Steinway School is equipped with state-of-the-art equipment for budding musicians, producers, and teachers.
Facilities
Jerry Falwell Library
Study with friends, grab a hot drink from Argo Tea, or get help with research at the Jerry Falwell Library. With almost half a million books, countless electronic resources, and study spaces for any student, the library is an essential resource to academic success.
Liberty Mountain
Enjoy an afternoon hammocking at Hydaway Outdoor Recreation Center or a sunset from the LU Monogram on Liberty Mountain. The mountain borders Campus East and provides many outdoor recreation opportunities such as 50+ miles of trails, an outdoor snowless ski slope, an equestrian center, and more.
Montview Student Union
Montview Student Union is a central gathering space on campus. With several dining locations, including Woodfire Pizza Company and Starbucks, and entertainment options like an 8-lane bowling alley, the Montview is a favorite place to study and play.
The Food Court at Reber-Thomas
Ranked #4 on BestColleges.com’s 2019 Best Dining Halls list, The Food Court at Reber-Thomas is our main dining hall on campus. It features over 20 food stations, including an allergen-free station and vegetarian options."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/virtual-experiences-at-lu/tour-our-campus/residential-dorms/","Tour Our Dorms
Niche.com has ranked our on-campus housing in the top 20 best college dorms in America and #2 in Virginia for 2023. Choose from traditional residence halls, hotel-style dorms, or apartment-style living so you can find the most comfortable option for you.
Campus East
Residential Commons
The Hill"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/virtual-experiences-at-lu/tour-our-campus/","Our 7,000-acre campus is located in the heart of the Blue Ridge Mountains and features one of the largest academic lawns in the state, spanning from South Campus to the Freedom Tower — Liberty’s newest landmark. The Academic Lawn sees tailgates during football season, our annual Christmas tree lighting in December, and Student Activities events like outdoor movie nights and concerts throughout the school year.
Just announced: New Reber Thomas Dining Hall Coming Fall 2023
New Reber Thomas Dining Hall"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/virtual-experiences-at-lu/virtual-admissions-appointment/","Have Any Questions?
Our admissions team is here to assist you with any questions you have about your upcoming visit. Let us know how we can help you!
Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/flamespass/flames-cash/on-campus/","Flames Cash On Campus
Use Flames Cash On-Campus:
Concessions
Baseball
Lahaye Ice Center
Snowflex Center
Dining by Sodexo
Dorm Laundry
ID & Campus Services
IT Marketplace
Lahaye Ice Center Pro Shop
Lahaye Rec & Fitness
Liberty University Barnes & Noble Bookstore
Montview Bowling Alley 
BOGO free games on Monday!
Outdoor Recreation
Postal Services
Vending Machines
Get Discounts for Dining
Get 15% Off Sodexo Brands:
Get 10% Off National Brands:"
"https://www.liberty.edu/coronavirus/","Champions Together
Protecting you, our campus, and our community.
COVID-19 Vaccine Documentation
As Liberty University navigates through the worldwide pandemic, students and employees are encouraged to provide documentation of their COVID-19 vaccine upon full vaccination, as this information will be used to calculate and potentially reduce quarantine timeframe.
Students can submit a record of their vaccination via the Student Health Form.
Employees can submit a record of their vaccination via the Employee Health Form.
Please contact Liberty University Student Health Center and Wellness Initiatives at (434) 592-7770 or at healthandwellness@liberty.edu if you have any questions.
Get Up-to-Date Coronavirus Information for Liberty"
"https://www.liberty.edu/students/student-counseling/individual-counseling/","Welcome!
Welcome to
LU CAPS!
Liberty University’s Counseling and Psychological Services are here to assist students with their mental health concerns.
Learn More 
Mental Health Screening
Know what
you need?
Our mental health screening is a great way to know whether counseling might be the next option for you.
Learn More 
Counseling Options
A variety of counseling options
We offer a variety of counseling services to meet your needs.
Learn more 
During the Fall and Spring semesters, our walk-in hours are Monday, Tuesday, & Thursday: 9 a.m. – 3 p.m. and Wednesday & Friday 12 p.m. – 3 p.m. Walk-in hours may close early due to high demand during these semesters. The green bar below is updated with the current status of our walk-in hours and whether they are OPEN or CLOSED.
Our summer walk-in hours differ from semester hours. Please see the green bar below for current walk-in hours.
CAPS walk-in hours for new clients have CLOSED today. Walk-in hours will resume tomorrow at 12pm.
*Regardless of our walk-in status, crisis services are available during our summer office hours Monday – Friday 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. (closed 12 p.m. – 1 p.m. and all day Wednesdays). For emergency assistance after hours, please contact your Resident Director or call the LUPD emergency line at (434) 592-3911.
We're Here For You
The quality of your mental health affects not only your academic performance, but every aspect of your life as a student. If you’re going through a tough time or have an immediate crisis, get help today with Liberty University’s Counseling and Psychological Services (LU CAPS).
Every student’s mental health journey is unique, which is why LU CAPS offers a variety of counseling options to meet your needs. Students can find care through drop-in consultations, group meetings, or individual sessions. Whatever you’re going through, we can help find the best option for you.
Mental Health Screening
Mental health is a key part of your well-being, so it’s good to find counseling and resources. Our screening is completely anonymous and confidential. Following the brief questionnaire, you’ll see your results, recommendations, and key resources.
Learn More
I think that the Student Counseling Services creates an environment where you feel welcomed. I think that there is already a stigma on counseling and it was beneficial to me to know that it was normalized and made me feel safe.
My counselor is amazing and I felt very comfortable to meet with her. She really understood my issues and helped me to analyze how to fix them. She met me on my level and spoke my language, it made it a very nice experience for me. I can see a difference in myself in the last session from the very first session I attended. I am very happy and proud of what my counselor has helped me do.
My counselor has done an incredible job of balancing what I need and what I feel. She has listened and strategically allowed my mind to think in a healthier, more truthful way. She is very trusting and genuine and excels at what she does. She combines my own personal life and feelings with the Truth. She has helped restructure the way I think and view my circumstances to be more accurate and beneficial. She has taken the time to meet my needs and help me slow down. Her patience and joy has had an unforgettable impact on my life.
Going through counseling gave me a renewed peace, joy, and hope in my life. I struggled with a lot of anxiety and fear after being in natural disasters while living in South Asia. With counseling, I was able to work though traumatic events and memories in a safe and healthy way. I found freedom from panic attacks, anxiety, and nightmares that used to invade my life.
My counselor is my hero. I wouldn’t be where I am today without her. Before coming to counseling, I was in a very bad place emotionally and mentally. I believed these struggles were something to deal with on my own and it really made matters worse. The counseling services at Liberty really opened my eyes to seeking out the help I desperately needed and aided in getting me to a much better emotional, mental, and spiritual place than when I first entered campus.
I think that the Student Counseling Services creates an environment where you feel welcomed. I think that there is already a stigma on counseling and it was beneficial to me to know that it was normalized and made me feel safe.
My counselor is amazing and I felt very comfortable to meet with her. She really understood my issues and helped me to analyze how to fix them. She met me on my level and spoke my language, it made it a very nice experience for me. I can see a difference in myself in the last session from the very first session I attended. I am very happy and proud of what my counselor has helped me do.
My counselor has done an incredible job of balancing what I need and what I feel. She has listened and strategically allowed my mind to think in a healthier, more truthful way. She is very trusting and genuine and excels at what she does. She combines my own personal life and feelings with the Truth. She has helped restructure the way I think and view my circumstances to be more accurate and beneficial. She has taken the time to meet my needs and help me slow down. Her patience and joy has had an unforgettable impact on my life.
Going through counseling gave me a renewed peace, joy, and hope in my life. I struggled with a lot of anxiety and fear after being in natural disasters while living in South Asia. With counseling, I was able to work though traumatic events and memories in a safe and healthy way. I found freedom from panic attacks, anxiety, and nightmares that used to invade my life.
My counselor is my hero. I wouldn’t be where I am today without her. Before coming to counseling, I was in a very bad place emotionally and mentally. I believed these struggles were something to deal with on my own and it really made matters worse. The counseling services at Liberty really opened my eyes to seeking out the help I desperately needed and aided in getting me to a much better emotional, mental, and spiritual place than when I first entered campus.
I think that the Student Counseling Services creates an environment where you feel welcomed. I think that there is already a stigma on counseling and it was beneficial to me to know that it was normalized and made me feel safe.
Workshops
Our Emotional Wellness Workshops provide interactive lessons on managing mental wellness.
Learn more 
Events
Our monthly events provide a space to hear counselors speak and give insight on trending topics in our culture today.
Learn more 
Counseling Resources
We offer online resources for those in need of assistance with mental wellness.
Learn more 
Our office, located in Green Hall Room 1830, is open from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. M-F. For emergency assistance after office hours, please contact your RD or call the LUPD emergency line at (434) 592-3911."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/daily-campus-tours/event-calendar/","Have Any Questions?
Our admissions team is here to assist you with any questions you have about your upcoming visit. Let us know how we can help you!
Hours 
Mon.- Fri. | 8 a.m.-6 p.m.
Sat. | 8:30 a.m.-6 p.m.
Sun. | 12 p.m.-6 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/visit-guide/contacts/","DEAN/ DEPT HEAD	DEPARTMENT EMAIL	PHONE NUMBER	OFFICE LOCATION	
COLLEGE OF APPLIED STUDIES & ACADEMIC SUCCESS
Dr. Brian Yates casas@liberty.edu (434) 592-4108 DeMoss Hall, Room 1100
GENERAL EDUCATION
Dr. Ester Warren gened@liberty.edu (434) 592-5948 DeMoss Hall, Room 1882
COLLEGE OF ARTS & SCIENCES
Dr. Roger Schultz gsaxon@liberty.edu (434) 592-4031 DeMoss Hall, Suite 4312
DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY
Dr. Samuel Smith history@liberty.edu (434) 592-4366 DeMoss Hall, Suite 4382U
CENTER FOR CREATION STUDIES
Dr. Timothy Brophy tbrophy@liberty.edu (434) 582-2733 DeMoss Hall, Room 4382
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
Dr. Robert Young math@liberty.edu (434) 582-2093 DeMoss Hall, Suite 4284
DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH 
Dr. Ginny Dow englishdept@liberty.edu (434) 582-2260 DeMoss Hall, Suite 4062
DEPARTMENT OF MODERN LANGUAGES
Dr. Annik Miller modernlanguages@liberty.edu (434) 592-4025 DeMoss Hall, Suite 4014
DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY & CONSUMER SCIENCES
Mrs. Janet Brown facs@liberty.edu (434) 592-3682 DeMoss Hall, Suite 4132
HELMS SCHOOL OF GOVERNMENT
Robert Hurt government@liberty.edu (434) 592-3691 Green Hall, Room 1661
HONORS PROGRAM
Dr. Jim Nutter honorsprogram@liberty.edu (434) 592-3304 JFL, Scholars Commons, Room 364
LIBERTY UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF OSTEOPATHIC MEDICINE ADMISSIONS
Benjamin Smith 
(434) 592-6400 
Liberty University College of Osteopathic Medicine
306 Liberty View Lane
Lynchburg, VA 24502
ROTC
AIR FORCE
Major Mike McKenna 
(434) 924-6831
DeMoss Hall 4074
ARMY
Susan Kellett-Forsyth 
(434) 924-7101 
Green Hall, Suite 1886
SCHOOL OF AERONAUTICS
Dr. Richard Roof aviation@liberty.edu (434) 582-2183 DeMoss Hall, Suite 2330
SCHOOL OF BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
Dr. Kenyon Knapp SBSDean@liberty.edu (434) 582-7303 DeMoss Hall, Suite 3046 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY CARE & COUNSELING 
Dr. Dwight Rice dccc@liberty.edu (434) 592-4049 DeMoss Hall, Suite 3126
DEPARTMENT OF COUNSELOR EDUCATION & FAMILY SCIENCES 
Dr. Elias Moitinho counseling@liberty.edu (434) 592-4049 DeMoss Hall, Suite 3126
DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHOLOGY 
Dr. Kevin Conner psychology@liberty.edu (434) 592-6285 DeMoss Hall, Suite 3014
DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WORK
Cheryl Nitz residentialsocialwork@liberty.edu (434) 582-7570 DeMoss Hall Suite, 3314
SCHOOL OF BUSINESS
Dr. Dave Bratt schoolofbusiness@liberty.edu (434) 592-7321 School of Business, Suites 3800 & 3900 
SCHOOL OF COMMUNICATION & THE ARTS
Dr. Scott Hayes sca@liberty.edu (434) 582-2777 Green Hall, Room 1365
DEPARTMENT OF CINEMATIC ARTS, ZAKI GORDON CENTER
Stephan Schultze cinema@liberty.edu (434) 592-6200 Green Hall, Suite 1892
DEPARTMENT OF DIGITAL MEDIA & JOURNALISM
John Rost jcrost@liberty.edu (434) 582-2111 Green Hall, Room 1370A
DEPARTMENT OF STRATEGIC & PERSONAL COMMUNICATION
Marie Mallory jflenehan@liberty.edu (434) 582-2111 Green Hall, Room 1370A
DEPARTMENT OF STUDIO & DIGITAL ARTS
Todd Smith jbking1@liberty.edu (434) 592-5900 Green Hall, Suite 1370
DEPARTMENT OF THEATRE ARTS
Linda Cooper theatre@liberty.edu (434) 582-7078 Green Hall, Suite 1878
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity
SCHOOL OF DIVINITY
Dr. Troy Temple divinity@liberty.edu (434) 582-2569 Freedom Tower, Suite 2010
DEPARTMENT OF GLOBAL STUDIES
Dr. Melody Harper globalstudies@liberty.edu (434) 582-7500 Freedom Tower, Room 2100
DEPARTMENT OF BIBLICAL STUDIES
Dr. Ronnie Campbell rpcampbell@liberty.edu (434) 592-3550 Freedom Tower, Room 2630
DEPARTMENT OF THEOLOGICAL STUDIES
Dr. Ronnie Campbell rpcampbell@liberty.edu (434) 592-3550 Freedom Tower, Room 2630
DEPARTMENT OF CHRISTIAN LEADERSHIP & CHURCH MINISTRIES
Dr. Jonathan Geukgeuzian jgeukgeuzian@liberty.edu (434) 582-2350 Freedom Tower, Room 3250
SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
Dr. Deanna Keith soedean@liberty.edu (434) 582-7889 DeMoss Hall, Suite 1314
SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING
Dr. Mark Horstemeyer se@liberty.edu (434) 592-7150 DeMoss Hall, Suite 3300E
Dr. Carl Pettiford se@liberty.edu (434) 592-3437 
SCHOOL OF HEALTH SCIENCES
Dr. Heidi DiFrancesca (434) 582-2330 Center for Medical and Health Sciences,
Room 2092
DEPARTMENT OF ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONS
Dr. Jim Schoffstall jeschoffstall@liberty.edu (434) 582-2329 Center for Medical and Health Sciences, 
Room T04
DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY & CHEMISTRY
Dr. Jeremy Sellers biology@liberty.edu (434) 582-2209 Center for Medical and Health Sciences, 
Room 243
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC & COMMUNITY HEALTH
Dr. Oswald Attin bepublichealth@liberty.edu (434) 582-2333 Center for Medical and Health Sciences, 
Room 2079
SCHOOL OF LAW
Morse H. Tan lawdean@liberty.edu (434) 592-5300 Green Hall, Room 1845
SCHOOL OF MUSIC
Dr. Stephen Müller som@liberty.edu (434) 592-3875 Center for Music & the Worship Arts, 
Suite 307
Alissa Passburg som@liberty.edu (434) 592-3875 
Joshua Tomes som@liberty.edu (434) 582-2203 
SCHOOL OF NURSING
Dr. Tracey Turner LUSONDean@liberty.edu (434) 582-2519 DeMoss Hall, Room 2142"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/graduate-visits/event-calendar/","Liberty has taught me how big the world is and how many opportunities there are out there. I have met so many authentic people that embody how the Lord cares for each of us and seen how Liberty is life-giving and perspective-broadening in terms of possibility.""
– Sarah Blanke ‘19, B.S. in Fashion Design and Business Entrepreneurship"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/decidelu/event-calendar/","Have Any Questions?
Our admissions team is here to assist you with any questions you have about your upcoming visit. Let us know how we can help you!
Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/experiencelu/event-calendar/","Have Any Questions?
Our admissions team is here to assist you with any questions you have about your upcoming visit. Let us know how we can help you!
Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/visit-us/graduate-visits/preview-event-calendar/","Hours
Call
Mon., Tues., Thurs., and Fri.
10 a.m.-9 p.m.
Wed.
9 a.m.-6 p.m.
Chat
Mon.-Fri.
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Sat.
Call/Chat | 10 a.m.-6 p.m."
"http://www.liberty.edu/AMEBook","–
+"
"http://www.liberty.edu/FINAIDGuide","Financial Aid Guide 
–
+"
"https://www.liberty.edu/transit/shuttle-service/","Liberty Shuttle Service
Service is provided to Liberty University students, faculty and staff who fill out the reservation form at least 48 hours in advance.
Important Shuttle Information
Transit Services will select a pickup time based on the information provided on the reservation form. You will then receive an email containing your reservation details.
Liberty University Transit Services cannot make any changes or provide refunds in case of cancellation or error. If you require a change, you will need to submit a new reservation. In the event of a delay or cancellation due to weather or mechanical issues with your transportation service provider (i.e. Amtrak, Greyhound or airline) please contact Transit Services at (434) 592-3640 or email TransitDispatch@liberty.edu"
"http://www.liberty.edu/visitorguide","Visitor Guide Booklet 
–
+"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/lynchburg/","Take a Trip through the Seasons in Lynchburg, Va.
Explore one of the most scenic cities in Virginia. The “Hill City” is surrounded by seven hills that offer a variety of parks and trails, and the James River provides plenty of places to cool off in the summer. (And if you love tomatoes, you can thank Thomas Jefferson, who allegedly ate one in Lynchburg just to prove they weren’t poisonous apples.) No matter the time of year, you’re sure to find something you’ll enjoy.
Spring
Everything You Need at Your Fingertips
As Lynchburg shakes off its winter slumber, the trees and plants come to life. Animals, insects, and people buzz in anticipation of things to look forward to in this season of rebirth.
A City Reborn
Lynchburg is an old city with a fresh feel. And if you’re a history buff, you’ll enjoy exploring Civil War trails, classic 1800s architecture, and historical homes and museums, including Thomas Jefferson’s Poplar Forest and Patrick Henry’s Red Hill.
Fresh Eatin’
Everyone’s a foodie these days. If you’re looking for craft burgers or local produce, Lynchburg is a one-stop-shop for great eating. Take in the Saturday morning farmers market or wander along Lynchburg’s Bluff Walk for original restaurants serving fresh favorites.
Stagecraft
With a growing community of local artists and craftsmen, Lynchburg offers a unique combination of theater and music that you can’t afford to miss. From art galleries to the recently restored Academy Center of the Arts, Lynchburg’s cultural scene is sure to delight.
Summer
Take the Adventure Outside
As the days heat up, it’s time to head out and enjoy the warm days and cool evenings.
Festivals
Stick around for the summer months and you’ll find concerts, fairs, food, and everything else you could ask for from your new home away from home.
Evening Entertainment
Don’t spend the summer nights inside — head out into the city for a concert, Lynchburg Hillcats minor league baseball game, or an escape room.
Get Outdoors
Lynchburg is a nature lover’s dream with mountains to hike, parks to roam, and a dozen great fishing spots. Climb the Peaks of Otter, explore Natural Bridge State Park, or bike the Blackwater Creek Trails.
Fall
The Times They Are A Changin’
It’s that time of year when the leaves change color and the Blue Ridge Mountains transform into a beautiful tapestry of red, orange, and yellow.
Hit the Trails
Many people believe that autumn is the best time to discover the natural splendor of the Blue Ridge Mountains. Take in breathtaking fall foliage views along the 50+ miles of trails on Liberty Mountain or join thousands of athletes who travel from across the state to run the annual Virginia 10-Miler.
Harvest
Calling all foodies! Join Lynchburg locals in the streets when traffic is shut down for vendors, entertainers, and artisans during Lynchburg’s annual street festival, Get Downtown. Or get a taste of Lynchburg at the Harvest Festival/Locavore Cook-off, held every October on Main Street.
Winter
The Most Wonderful Time …
Winter is coming so we might as well enjoy it. Get moving and stay warm out there!
Let It Snow
If you love winter sports, you’ll love Liberty. Whether you’re a Quebec native and lifelong skater or a Texan interested in trying to snowboard, the Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre, LaHaye Ice Center, and nearby Wintergreen Ski Resort give you lots of cold-weather options for fun.
Keep Warm
What’s better on a winter day than coffee and pastries? (The correct answer is “Nothing!”) If you’re looking for a cozy place to escape the cold weather, you’ve got nearly a dozen local cafés to choose from.
Sports
People live for their winter sports, even here in Central Virginia. Thankfully, we’ve got NCAA Division I teams to keep things interesting year-round. Liberty is one of the only universities in the nation to boast a men’s and a women’s hockey team in every division!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/intensives-lodging/","Intensives Lodging Options for Online Students
Students pursuing one of our online degrees that require on-campus intensive courses have the option to choose from either Liberty’s intensives housing packages or book independently for housing accommodations. Students pursuing one of Liberty University’s degrees online are just as important to us as our residential students. For this reason, we seek to provide a variety of housing options for our students that best fit their needs.
Please note that the hotel and other lodging options provided below are meant to serve as suggestions and are not necessarily endorsed by Liberty University. When choosing lodging accommodations, students should look for hotels with available shuttle services to campus if they do not plan to drive while in Lynchburg.
What Does the Intensives Housing Package Include?
In order to best accommodate our online degree program students, we have sought out the best method of making the intensives experience an enjoyable one. To achieve this, Liberty University has collaborated with local hotels to provide convenient and affordable housing packages for students seeking to complete their online programs.
Many other online universities with on-campus intensives do not offer housing accommodation packages. But students pursuing one of Liberty University’s degrees online can pay a fee combining the cost of hotel, meals, and shuttle and hospitality services posted directly to their student accounts.
Review the details of our Off-Campus Week-long Intensive Package.
Intensive Courses at a Christian University
Intensives are weeklong or weekend on-campus classes where students pursuing one of our degrees online experience professor and peer interaction. Some of our online master’s programs and online doctoral programs have degree tracks that require or offer optional residential intensives.
This is a great time to explore your campus and immerse yourself in the Liberty atmosphere. This variant of your Christian college online experience allows you to have the opportunity to interact with professors face to face and gain a higher level of quality in your education. Students mostly interacting with one another in online classes will now be able to interact with fellow classmates face-to-face while attending these on-campus intensives.
Accommodations
Hotel Accommodations
Bella Vista Hotel & Suites"
"https://www.liberty.edu/account","Important Information
Creation of your email account may take up to six hours. When you log into your email for the first time, you will be asked to provide More Information that will be used to setup Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA) on your account. The Microsoft Authenticator app or a phone number can be used for this purpose. More information regarding this setup process can be found in our HelpDesk DIY article.
You will also be prompted add a phone number or non-Liberty email address to your account. If you reset your password in the future using Self Service Password Recovery (SSPR), a verification code will be sent to the phone or email address you provide. For more information and instructions about this process, visit our HelpDesk DIY article. 
For more information and instructions about this process, known as Automated Password Reset, visit our HelpDesk DIY article.
If you need assistance with MFA or SSPR setup, contact the Liberty University IT HelpDesk at (866) 447-2869 during normal business hours
What will I need to claim an Account?
Please note that when claiming or maintaining your account, you will be asked for personal information (such as your LUID) to identify yourself. All information MUST match the information on our records system. If you are unsure if your current information matches what we have on record, please contact one of the following, based on your current status:
New Students:
To claim your account, you will need your Student ID number (LUID). If you have not received this yet, then please call (800) 543-5317 for Resident Admissions or (800) 424-9595 for Online Admissions for further assistance.
Resident Students:
You must present a photo ID and your student ID number (LUID) at the Registrar’s office to request a change of information.
Liberty University Online Students:
Online students, please call (800) 424-9595 for assistance.
Faculty/Staff:
Please present a photo ID at the Human Resources office to verify/change personal information such as current address or date of birth. If you are a remote employee, you can contact HR via email/phone on the HR Website.
Alumni or Returning Students
To regain access to your LU account, you will need to re-claim your account using your Student ID number (LUID). If you do not remember your LUID, then please call (800) 543-5317 for Resident Admissions or (800) 424-9595 for Online Admissions for further assistance.
Why Login?
Once created, you can use your Liberty username and password to access many different resources.
These Include:
Email
Check your Liberty email using the Outlook desktop application or webmail.
Assist
Access personal info, grades, register for classes, etc.
Web Apps for Faculty/Staff
Access resources such as the management system, WordPress, etc.
Pharos Print Details
Check your Pharos print history and charges.
Set Your Back-Up Information for Your Account
Have you ever been locked out of an account and needed to reset your password? This can be a pain. When you claim your account, you will be prompted to set up an alternate email and/or phone address. Please provide one or both forms of authentication so that you can easily reset your password if you’re ever locked out."
"https://www.liberty.edu/casas/student-advocate-office/scholarship-search/","Scholarship Search
What is Scholarship Search 101?
In Scholarship Search 101 (SS101) learn how to get additional funds to help finance your college education! This session helps with tips and techniques for successful online scholarship searches. Plus, hear Liberty University success stories and get your questions answered.
Upcoming Dates
Students! Make sure to RSVP for an upcoming Scholarship Search 101 session through Compass. You will find the sessions within the Events tab and can RSVP there. We look forward to seeing you then!
Thursday, November 9th, 4:00 p.m.– In-person Meeting – DeMoss Hall 3064
Thursday, March 7th, 4:00 p.m.– In-person Meeting – DeMoss Hall 3064
Scholarship Search 101 Overview
We have created a brief video of SS101. This video provides a basic overview of what is covered in the classes.
We highly encourage students to also attend SS101 where you will be provided with a more in-depth view of searching as well as the opportunity to ask our advisors questions that are more specific to your needs.
Your Next Steps
Now that you’ve learned how to search for scholarships through our SS101 resources, you’re ready to begin organizing your own search! View our search tips for finding outside scholarships."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/legacy-scholarship/","Can’t access your account?"
"http://www.liberty.edu/aeronautics/scholarships","Aviation Scholarship Opportunities
Scholarships Offered by School of Aeronautics
LaFleur Memorial Scholarship 
The Ethan LaFleur Memorial Scholarship Fund was created by the LaFleur’s in honor of their son, Ethan, who once attended Liberty University School of Aeronautics. This fund is open to all Residential Flight Course Students. It is designed to help students apply for assistance when having trouble funding the end of their flight course. Note: NCAA Scholarship and GI Bill® recipients are not eligible."
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/allied-health-professions/athletic-training-scholarships/","Athletic Training Scholarships
Additional Navigation
Liberty University Sports Medicine Scholarships
Sports Medicine Scholarship Application
These Scholarships are available through the Sports Medicine Department within the Department of Athletics. Scholarships are awarded to athletic training students to help offset the cost of tuition and other school-related expenses. Students are rewarded for service to the athletic teams that go above and beyond what is required to meet Athletic Training Program requirements for clinical rotations. This includes team coverage that may be necessary before the start or finish of the semester and into holidays or scheduled academic breaks. Scholarships are available for fully admitted students in their junior and senior years.
To get more information, please contact Aaron Schreiner at aschreiner@liberty.edu
More Available Scholarships
Jeff Taylor Memorial Scholarship 
Contact vpickard@liberty.edu
Virginia Athletic Trainers’ Association
Mid-Atlantic Athletic Trainers’ Association
National Athletic Trainers’ Association Research & Education Foundation"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/scholarships/","School of Music Scholarships
The Liberty University School of Music (SOM) is pleased to offer an exciting scholarship initiative for all musical disciplines within the School of Music. SOM Scholarships are competitive awards for music majors who demonstrate excellence in their chosen instrument and field of study. SOM Scholarship recipients are selected by the SOM Scholarship Committee based on the following criteria: academic achievement, musicianship, financial need (according to the standards of the Liberty University Student Accounts), and walk with God.
New Student Scholarship Application
Fill out the New Student SOM Scholarships Application.
Complete a School of Music Placement Audition.
**Priority consideration for SOM scholarships will be given to students who audition and apply prior to January 31, 2023.
Current Student Scholarship Application
To be considered for SOM Scholarships, current SOM Majors must submit a completed application. No audition is required for current SOM students.
The deadline for the current student SOM scholarship for the 2023-2024 academic year is March 8, 2023.
Current Student Scholarship Application
Graduate Student Assistant/Scholarship Application
First, make sure you have the following ready to submit with your application: 
Unofficial undergraduate transcripts
Letter of recommendation
Audition video on primary instrument
Resume
Fill out the Graduate Student/ GSA application.
**Priority consideration for SOM scholarships will be given to students who audition and apply prior to January 31, 2023.
Graduate Student Assistant/Scholarship Application
Questions? Email: somscholarships@liberty.edu
SOM Scholarship Renewal Information
Unless otherwise noted, all SOM Scholarships are one-year awards. Students may re-apply for available SOM scholarships each academic year.
How SOM Scholarships Work with Financial Aid
How SOM Scholarships Work with Financial Aid
Liberty University School of Music scholarships are considered financial aid, just as grants, work-study, and loans. Federal and state financial aid programs require that students not receive financial aid in excess of one’s cost of education, which includes living expenses as outlined in the General Scholarship Rule. Scholarships are factored into financial need assessments.
Liberty University Scholarships/Financial Aid
Information about University-wide scholarships (scholarships that are not specifically for music students) and other types of financial assistance is available through the following links:
Financial Aid
Scholarships by Category
International Student Scholarships
Marching Band & Spirit Band Scholarships
Frequently Asked Questions
Do I have to be a School of Music Major to be eligible to receive School of Music scholarships?
With the exception of certain auditioned scholarship groups, all SOM Scholarship recipients must be a declared SOM Major.
As a current student, do I have to complete an audition or submit an audition video?
No, current students only need to submit a scholarship application.
I plan to visit Liberty at some point, but I cannot attend one of the College For A Weekend (CFAW) events. Can I set up another time to audition?
Yes, you may set up a time to audition outside of the CFAW events. Please contact the appropriate Faculty Area Coordinator to set up an audition time.
I am not a School of Music Major, but I would like information about other scholarships.
Please visit the Student Financial Services website for information concerning University-wide scholarships.
If you have any further questions, please contact us at somscholarships@liberty.edu."
"http://www.liberty.edu/outsidescholarships","Investing in your future – it’s easier than you think
Education, friendships, experiences – getting excited about all the new things that come with pursuing higher education? College is one of most exhilarating times in the lives of many people. You’ll have the opportunity to learn more about your future career, relationships, and yourself.
But the question remains – how do you finance it? Liberty University offers a variety of institutional aid opportunities and accepts federal aid. But did you know that you can bring outside scholarships to Liberty? Our College of Applied Studies and Academic Success (CASAS) can assist you with your search for academic support and outside aid, or…
Take a look at some of the ways you can find legitimate outside aid:
Scholarship Search Tips
Taking the time to look for outside scholarships is a valuable investment, so make sure you’re prepared to do it right! If you’re a current student, or planning on visiting for College For A Weekend (CFAW), take a look at our Scholarship Search classes.
In the meantime, get your scholarship search started with these tips:
Brainstorm
What is unique about you? Compile a list of characteristics about you and your family. Be sure to include some of your hobbies and talents. You’ll find scholarships for just about everything. Have you ever experienced an embarrassing situation? Do you like to make people laugh? If so, check out the Make Me Laugh Scholarship!
Pull out your thesaurus. Instead of searching for “Wool Scholarships,” pull out your Webster’s Dictionary and Thesaurus and substitute the word “scholarship” with synonyms (like fund, foundation, or society).
Take a Look Around
What’s in your fridge and your closet? There are brand names everywhere. Many of these companies offer scholarships. Next time you take a sip of your favorite soda, check to see if there’s a related scholarship.
Community outreach. Are you from a small town? Check out your local Elk Lodge, community library, or women’s groups. The possibilities are endless.
Be Professional
Got a résumé? Now that you’re in college or preparing for it, it’s time for you to sharpen your professional portfolio with a résumé. Visit Liberty’s Career Center for free résumé workshops!
Build relationships. Make sure you have at least three references you can entrust to give good feedback to potential scholarship donors. Mentors, pastors, and teachers are a good place to start.
Get Started
Google it. Bing it. Yahoo! it. Take your list of characteristics (or personal identifiers) and combine them with your list of scholarship synonyms. When you utilize the internet to help you search for scholarships, the possibilities are endless.
Write it out. Writing support letters is a great way to find scholarships. Ask for prayer and financial support as you share your heart, your mission, and your goals with potential donors, and the Lord will do the rest!
Don’t Judge a Book by Its Cover
You never know who will be willing to create a scholarship for you or donate funds to your education. Keep an open mind about every business and organization. Even the ones you wouldn’t expect may be willing to provide financial assistance for your education.
Scholarship of the Month
Every month, College of Applied Studies and Academic Success (CASAS) hosts a Scholarship of the Month. This is a legitimate scholarship opportunity that the CASAS has found on your behalf. All you have to do is apply and see what happens.
Depending on the scholarship, you could receive up to $5,000! Plus, you can apply every month for the new, highlighted scholarship.
Learn more >
Scholarship Search Classes
Our College of Applied Studies and Academic Success (CASAS) offers free, one-time courses on campus to help you find outside scholarships. This class will teach you tips and techniques for successful online scholarship searches. Plus, you’ll hear Liberty University student success stories and get all your questions answered.
If you’re a current student, you can sign up to attend a Scholarship Search 101 session. If you’re still considering Liberty, you can attend one of these sessions when you visit us during College For A Weekend (CFAW)!
Beware of Scholarship Scams
Although there is a multitude of legitimate outside scholarship opportunities recognized by Liberty University, please be cautious as you conduct your scholarship search. If you have questions about the legitimacy of an outside scholarship, please email the your Professional Advisor at advising@liberty.edu.
Watch out for these signs of a scam as you look for scholarships:
Money back guarantees or extra fees, as typically one should not have to pay to apply for a scholarship
Guaranteed receipt of a scholarship or grant, since being awarded a scholarship is never guaranteed
Requiring credit or bank account information
Requiring personal information, such as a social security number
Extremely high success rates or large amounts of hype
Not providing the name or direct contact information of the actual institution offering the scholarship
Excessive spelling, grammar, or formatting errors
Scholarships from “Federal Agencies” that cannot be substantiated by that agency’s direct website
No specific deadline or other important application information provided
Contact and notification by phone with no email, address, or other forms of written documentation being exchanged
Being awarded a scholarship when no application was submitted
Inability of institution to provide any information of previous award history
Questions?
Contact the College of Applied Studies and Academic Success (CASAS) if you’ve got any questions about outside scholarships!
Hours
CASAS Front Desk
Monday-Friday
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Tutoring & Writing Coaching
Monday-Thursday, 9 a.m.-9 p.m.
Friday, 9 a.m.-5 p.m.
Closed for Convocation
Wednesday & Friday, 10:15-11:45 a.m."
"http://www.liberty.edu/prechatform/?dept=StudentAccounts","We're sorry we missed you! Our offices are currently closed. Please see below for office hours and additional contact information.
student accounts Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat: 10:00AM - 6:00PM EST
Sun: Closed
Back to Contacts"
"http://www.liberty.edu/prechatform/?dept=FinancialAid","We're sorry we missed you! Our offices are currently closed. Please see below for office hours and additional contact information.
financial aid Hours:
Mon, Wed, Tue, Thu, Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat: 10:00AM - 6:00PM EST
Sun: Closed
Back to Contacts"
"https://www.liberty.edu/fci/student/index.html","Can’t access your account?"
"http://www.liberty.edu/prechatform/?dept=ResidentUG","We're sorry we missed you! Our offices are currently closed. Please see below for office hours and additional contact information.
residential undergrad Hours:
Mon - Fri: 8:00AM - 5:00PM EST
Sat: 10:00AM - 6:00PM EST
Sun: Closed
Our Admissions Office is available by phone at (800) 543-5317, Mon, Tues, Thurs, and Fri from 10:00AM to 9:00PM EST, Wed from 9:00AM to 6:00PM EST, and Sat 10:00AM to 6:00PM EST. You can also email us at admissions@liberty.edu."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/","Become a Medical or Health Expert with Our School of Health Sciences
Are you passionate about science or medicine? How about working to improve the lives of others? By pursuing a degree within our School of Health Sciences, you will be set up for an exhilarating career in a scientific or health field.
We understand that you love science. You love God, and you’re excited about His creation and how we can use it to better the lives of others. We’re excited to provide degrees that help you reach your personal and career goals!
School of Health Sciences Programs
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s School of Health Sciences?
At Liberty University, we want you to receive a top-notch education that prepares you to enter the career field of your choice or apply to prestigious graduate programs. With a degree from our School of Health Sciences, you’ll be able to do just that.
Our School of Health Sciences has three different departments, each with its own unique programs and benefits.
Our Department of Biology and Chemistry offers degrees ranging from pre-med and biotechnology to forensic science.
The Department of Allied Professions has state-of-the-art technology available to students as well as programs in athletic training, exercise science, physical education, and respiratory therapy.
Our Department of Public Health prepares you to enter your career field upon graduation or use it as an alternate track to medical school.
Check out more about our School of Health Sciences departments below to see their benefits and discover the degree that best fits your career goals.
Department of Biology and Chemistry
Department of Allied Professions
Department of Public and Community Health
Learn more about meeting requirements for licensure or certification in your state."
"https://www.liberty.edu/flames/lfsn/","During each athletics season, Flames fans can catch all the action on the Liberty Flames Sports Network (LFSN), which is comprised of Liberty’s radio and television networks and has covered Flames athletics since 1981. The flagship radio station for Liberty Football is The Journey 88.3 FM in Lynchburg, Va. The 50,000-watt station is part of The Journey FM Radio Network, which has 18 affiliates that cover Virginia and much of North Carolina. Alan York began serving as the radio “Voice of the Flames” upon his hire in the fall of 2010 and is the radio play-by-play voice of football and men’s basketball. Nick Pierce handles radio and television play-by-play duties for Liberty Baseball, while Jamie Hall broadcasts Liberty Women’s Basketball. Liberty sports events are also broadcast on outlets across the nation, including the Mid- Atlantic Sports Network (MASN), various ESPN platforms, Cox Television Network, American Sports Network (ASN), The Walk, and various independent stations, representing more than 40 million households coast-to-coast. LFSN’s television broadcast team consists of trained professionals who have worked for most of the major sports networks in the United States, including ESPN, ABC Sports, CBS Sports, NBC Sports, NASCAR, SportSouth, Comcast, and Fox Sports."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/bachelors/","Earn Your Bachelor’s Degree in a Science, Medical, or Health Profession
You’re passionate about helping others, honoring God, and finding a career that matches your interests. That’s why our School of Health Sciences degrees are designed to get you where you need to be—whether that is entering your career field of choice after graduation or preparing to attend graduate school.
Through our School of Health Sciences, you can pursue degrees in a wide range of areas of study like biomedical sciences (pre-med), zoo and wildlife biology, forensic science, exercise science, respiratory therapy, public health, and more. If you’re passionate about science, medicine, or health, and you love helping people, we have a degree for you.
Don’t wait any longer. Start pursuing your calling today! With a degree from our School of Health Sciences, you’ll be one step closer to your career goals.

Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
School of Health Sciences Available Degree Programs
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Biomedical Sciences (Pre-med)
Conservation and Environmental Biology
Physical Education and Health
Why Choose One of Liberty’s Health Sciences Bachelor’s Degrees?
You’re looking for a degree that will set you up for success as you pursue a career in health sciences. At Liberty, we have made every effort to ensure the degree you receive is challenging, fulfilling, and marketable.
Each of our health sciences programs provides hands-on experience that is integrated into the curriculum as well as exciting internship opportunities. For instance, our Biology and Chemistry Department offers lab-intensive courses to make sure you are actively using the knowledge and skills you gain in the classroom. Our forensic science degree offers internship opportunities with the FBI, Department of Homeland Security, local police offices, and government departments as well as opportunities in Washington D.C.
Not only will you receive hands-on experience, but you’ll also learn from some of the top professors in the field. Each of our professors has years of experience in their field, and they are dedicated to your success as they work with you in the classroom and labs every week.
School of Health Sciences Degree Information
Residential
120-141 total credit hours
Transfer in up to 75% of your total degree
View our course catalog
Admission Requirements for Undergraduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/bachelors/exercise-science/fitness-specialist/","Join the Fitness Movement with an Exercise Science: Fitness Specialist Degree
Have you always been passionate about fitness and improving the lives of others? We’re passionate about that too, and more importantly about helping you find a degree that furthers your career goals! Our exercise science – fitness specialist degree provides the training you need to pair your passions with a future career you’ll love.
Exercise science is a challenging program and an exciting industry. Pursuing our fitness specialist degree gives you the opportunity to start your career upon graduation or be prepared to enter graduate school. Throughout this degree, you’ll be equipped to work as an exercise physiologist or fitness specialist in wellness centers, medical clinics, fitness facilities, and human performance labs.
Don’t wait any longer! We’ll assist you in living out your dream of being a champion for fitness.

Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Exercise Science: Fitness Specialist Degree?
Figuring out what degree you should pursue is a big decision. At Liberty, our goal is to provide you with a top-notch education so that you are ready to start your career after graduating.
Here’s what choosing our exercise science degree with a specialization in fitness specialist degree means for you:
Our program is nationally accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP), meaning it is both highly esteemed as well as recognized by employers and graduate schools.
All of our professors have years of experience in the field and have earned his or her doctorate in a related program.
You’ll gain hands-on experience with required labs, a practicum, and an optional internship.
Use top facilities including our Human Performance Lab, Motion Analysis Lab, Functional Assessment Labs, and Standardized Patient Assessment Labs.
Your degree is just as important to us as it is to you. And we’re excited to welcome you into the Liberty family. That’s why we have made every effort to ensure you are getting all the resources and skills you need to be successful in your program and your future career.
What Will You Learn in Our Exercise Science: Fitness Specialist Degree?
Our exercise science program prepares you to enter the field as an exercise physiologist or fitness specialist. How will you get there? Some of the foundational exercise science courses you’ll take in this degree cover topics like musculoskeletal terminology, physiology, health kinesiology, strength training and conditioning, biomechanics, and more!
Our fitness specialist track provides additional training in sports injuries, human movement, group exercise, and physical education. With knowledge in these areas, you’ll be well-equipped for your career in fitness.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information about what you’ll learn!
Featured Courses
EXSC 101 – Introduction to Exercise Science
EXSC 310 – Physiology of Exercise
EXSC 461 – Exercise Leadership
Highlights of Our Exercise Science – Fitness Specialist Degree
Our exercise science program is nationally accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP).
Every professor has years of experience and has earned his or her doctorate in a related field.
You are guaranteed hands-on experience with laboratory, practicum, and internship opportunities.
Our Human Performance Lab, Motion Analysis Lab, Functional Assessment Labs, and Standardized Patient Assessment Labs will ensure you are on the cutting edge of technology in your field.
Our students exceed the national pass rate on the American College of Sports Medicine Exercise Physiologist Certification Exam (ACSM C-EP), National Strength and Conditioning Association Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialist Exam (NSCA CSCS), and State Board of Certification Athletic Training Licensing Exam."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/bachelors/exercise-science/strength-and-conditioning/","Lead the Way in Fitness and Wellness with a Bachelor’s Degree in Exercise Science – Strength and Conditioning
Are you passionate about health and physical fitness? Do you care deeply about your own health and desire to see others live healthy lifestyles? If that sounds like you, Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Exercise Science – Strength and Conditioning Specialist degree will give you the tools you need to turn your passion into a career.
If you want to help others reach their peak physical fitness, then you’ve probably considered working as a coach, athletic trainer, or personal trainer. With this degree, you’ll have the skill set required for these types of roles. Additionally, you may be interested in furthering your education within the medical field to work as a chiropractor, physician’s assistant, or occupational therapist. This degree will equip you to pursue higher education within the medical field.
Being prepared with the knowledge and experience you need to pursue your career is an essential and exciting next step. With this exercise science degree, you can start helping others hit their stride and live healthier lives.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Exercise Science – Strength and Conditioning Specialist?
Credibility, professional teachers, and hands-on training — ready to pursue a program with all this and more? By choosing Liberty University’s bachelor’s degree in exercise science, you’ll receive the professional tools and training you need from a university that employers and graduate schools recognize. In addition to Liberty University’s regional accreditation through the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC), this undergraduate exercise science program is nationally accredited through the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP).
The professors who’ll be teaching you have years of real-life experience and doctoral degrees in exercise science-related fields. In addition to their professionalism, they ensure that each of your courses is taught from a Christian perspective and genuinely care about investing in your life both inside and outside of the classroom.
Finally, you’ll receive the experience you need to excel in the strength and conditioning area of exercise science. You’ll participate in multiple labs throughout your program as well as a required practicum and internship to ensure you have the opportunity to turn your classroom knowledge into practical application.
What Will You Learn in Our Exercise Science – Strength and Conditioning Specialist Program?
The curriculum throughout this program provides the training you’ll need to excel in the exercise science field. You’ll learn core concepts like how to measure and evaluate health, biomechanics, exercise physiology, and sports nutrition. You’ll have the opportunity to put this knowledge to practical use through a practicum and multiple labs throughout your program.
With the strength and conditioning specialization, you’ll complete the following courses:
Analysis of Human Movement
Applied Strength Training and Conditioning
Programming and Periodization of Strength and Conditioning
Seminar in Strength and Conditioning
Additionally, you’ll participate in an internship where you’ll receive hands-on training in your field prior to graduation.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information!
Featured Courses
EXSC 101 – Introduction to Exercise Science
EXSC 310 – Physiology of Exercise
EXSC 461 – Exercise Leadership
Highlights of Our B.S. in Exercise Science – Strength and Conditioning Degree
Our exercise science program is nationally accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP).
Every professor has years of experience and a doctorate in a related field.
You’ll receive hands-on experience with lab, practicum, and internship opportunities.
Our Human Performance Lab, Motion Analysis Lab, Functional Assessment Labs, and Standardized Patient Assessment Labs ensure you are on the cutting edge of the technology used in the field.
Our students exceed the national pass rate on the American College of Sports Medicine Exercise Physiologist Certification Exam (ACSM C-EP), National Strength and Conditioning Association Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialist Exam (NSCA CSCS), and State Board of Certification Athletic Training Licensing Exam."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/bachelors/exercise-science/therapeutic-science/","Jumpstart Your Career with a Degree in Exercise Science – Therapeutic Science
Do you want to invest in the future of medicine and change lives along the way? We want to help you meet that goal! Our exercise science in therapeutic science degree provides the foundational courses, tools, and experience you need to succeed in a medical profession.
This degree is designed as an alternative track to medical school. With this degree credential, you can apply to physical therapy, occupational therapy, or chiropractor school, as well as pursue further education or careers as a dietician or prosthetist.
Why wait any longer? You want to pursue a career in the medical field that helps others, and we want to help you get there. Our exercise science program is going to propel you forward into a fulfilling career.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Exercise Science – Therapeutic Science Degree?
We’re excited that you’re interested in our exercise science program! We have designed this degree to provide all the foundational knowledge, resources, and experience you need to succeed in your future career or apply to the graduate school of your choice.
What’s exciting about our therapeutic science specialization is all the benefits we offer through the program. Here are some things you can look forward to:
Our program is nationally accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP), so it will be recognized by whatever graduate program you apply to.
All of our professors have years of experience in the field and have earned his or her doctorate in a related program.
You’ll gain hands-on experience with required labs, a practicum, and an optional internship.
Use top facilities including our Human Performance Lab, Motion Analysis Lab, Functional Assessment Labs, and Standardized Patient Assessment Labs.
Join our exercise science program and we’ll get you one major step closer to your goals in the medical field. We can’t wait to guide you through your academic journey.
What Will You Learn in Our Exercise Science – Therapeutic Science Degree?
At Liberty, we want to provide you with a curriculum that will give you all the knowledge you need to be successful in your future career. With our exercise science specialization in therapeutic science degree, you’ll receive an exciting, unique, and challenging degree that prepares you for your future.
Our exercise science program prepares you to succeed in whatever exercise or medical field you choose. You’ll take courses in musculoskeletal terminology, the history of life, physiology of exercise, the essentials of strength training and conditioning, biomechanics, and exercise leadership.
If you are interested in pursuing our therapeutic science specialization, you’ll study additional courses that will prepare you for medical school. These courses include:
Clinical Musculoskeletal Anatomy
Healthcare Evidenced-Based Research Analysis
Musculoskeletal Injury Assessment
Theory of Therapeutic Rehabilitation
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information about what you’ll learn!
Featured Courses
EXSC 101 – Introduction to Exercise Science
EXSC 310 – Physiology of Exercise
EXSC 461 – Exercise Leadership
Highlights of Our Exercise Science – Therapeutic Science Degree
Our exercise science program is nationally accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP).
Every professor has years of experience and has earned his or her doctorate in a related field.
You are guaranteed hands-on experience with laboratory, practicum, and internship opportunities.
Our Human Performance Lab, Motion Analysis Lab, Functional Assessment Labs, and Standardized Patient Assessment Labs will ensure you are on the cutting edge of technology in your field.
Our students exceed the national pass rate on the American College of Sports Medicine Exercise Physiologist Certification Exam (ACSM C-EP), National Strength and Conditioning Association Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialist Exam (NSCA CSCS), and State Board of Certification Athletic Training Licensing Exam."
"https://www.liberty.edu/casas/continuing-ed/cpr-first-aid-aed/","Health and Safety
Heartsaver CPR/First Aid/AED
Junior/Senior BLS Recertification
CNA Exam Course Registration"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/string-performance/","Grow as a Musician with Our B.M. in String Performance Degree
You love music and want to share that passion as an accompanist, soloist, or maybe even as an instructor. Throughout our bachelor’s degree in music, you can further your skills in the string instrument of your choice by working one-on-one with our distinguished faculty members – who have performed around the world as well as with singers and musicians like Yo-Yo Ma, Stevie Wonder, and Michael W. Smith.
At Liberty, our mission is to help you grow as a musician who leads with integrity in the music industry. Our B.M. in String Performance degree will prepare you to share your love of music in a way that impacts eternity.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Music – String Performance Degree? 
We are committed to providing you with the training you need to succeed in any career you choose in the music industry while using your musical talents to glorify God. Throughout our string performance program, you will learn from faculty members who have performed around the world and hold degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the country. As 1 of the top 10 largest schools of music in the nation, we offer a variety of classes and performance opportunities ranging from wind symphonies to jazz ensembles. 
At Liberty, we work to ensure you have the best learning environment possible. We offer state-of-the-art rehearsal, recording, and performance facilities. In addition, our courses are taught by expert musicians. 
What Will You Learn in Our String Performance Bachelor’s Degree Program?
Throughout our B.M. in String Performance degree program, you will learn the basic components of music including harmonic and commercial theory, musicianship, and conducting, so you are prepared for additional in-depth study of string instruments. You will also have the opportunity to work one-on-one with instructors to further your study of the instrument you choose. During your time studying with us, you can take advantage of performing with our symphony orchestra and other ensembles for additional experience. 
Our bachelor’s degree in string performance will help you prepare for a career in the music industry. You will learn how to teach string instruments and conduct ensembles, giving you the skills you need to become a private music teacher or lead a youth or community orchestra. In addition, you will learn about entrepreneurship and the Christian music community, opening the door to pursuing a career as a professional musician.
No matter what you feel called to do with your B.M. in String Performance degree, you will have the opportunity to gain practical, marketable experience through an internship in the field. View our string performance Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 200 – Music, Art, Worship, and Culture
MUSC 317 – Instrumental Conducting 
MUSC 364 – Contemporary Styles Survey I
MUSC 374 – String Techniques
Highlights of Our B.M. in String Performance Degree
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction, and our graduates have found careers playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, as Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our School of Music’s professional music publishing and recording company, and this student-run label provides students, staff, and faculty with the opportunity to publish their work.
Participate in our School of Music ensembles that perform in styles ranging from folk and bluegrass to a cappella and Latino.
Our wind symphony has performed at the CBDNA Southern Division Conference."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/woodwind-brass-or-percussion-performance/","Unite People through Music with Our Bachelor of Music (B.M.) Degree in Woodwind, Brass, or Percussion Performance 
Music brings people together, and our Bachelor of Music degree with a focus on woodwind, brass, or percussion performance provides the training you need to bring that sense of unity to your community through performing, conducting ensembles, and promoting the musical arts.
Throughout this degree, you will explore the relationship between music and culture while furthering your performance skills, so you are prepared to impact your community through music. Partner with us, and let us help you share the universal language of music with the world as a Champion for Christ. 
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s B.M. in Music Performance Degree? 
At Liberty, we are committed to providing you with the training you need to succeed in the music industry and use your talents to glorify God. In our woodwind, brass, or percussion performance bachelor’s degree, you will learn from experienced musicians who have earned their degrees from some of the best music schools around the world and are dedicated to mentoring you as you develop your own musical style. Our program is designed to help you reach your full potential as a musician who leads with excellence and integrity.
And as one of the top ten largest schools of music in the nation, we are able to offer a variety of classes and performance opportunities from wind symphonies to jazz ensembles. We also offer state-of-the-art classroom, performance, and recording facilities designed to help you prepare for your career.
What Will You Learn in Our Woodwind, Brass, or Percussion Performance Bachelor’s Degree Program?
Throughout our bachelor’s degree in music with a performance focus, you will study music theory, applied music studies, conducting, and music technology. You will also have the unique opportunity of working one-on-one with a distinguished instructor who will help further your technical and performance skills in your primary instrument.
As you progress in this degree program, you will study a secondary instrument to the one you primarily focus on. Some requirements of this program include participation in various ensemble performances and showcasing your accomplishments in a senior recital. To help you gain more marketable experience, you will also complete an internship with the music organization of your choice. 
View our woodwind, brass, or percussion performance Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 200 – Music, Art, Worship, and Culture
MUSC 310 – Principles of Arranging
MUSC 317 – Instrumental Conducting 
MUSC 360 – Commercial Improvisation Techniques
Highlights of Our B.M. in Woodwind, Brass, or Percussion Performance Degree
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction, and our graduates have found careers playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, as Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our School of Music’s professional music publishing and recording company, and this student-run label provides students, staff, and faculty with the opportunity to publish their work.
Our faculty members are experienced musicians who have studied and performed all over the world.
Our wind symphony has performed at the CBDNA Southern Division Conference."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/vocal-performance/","Find Your Unique Style with Our Bachelor of Music in Vocal Performance Degree 
Are you looking to enhance your vocal talent and earn a college degree in an area that interests you? Our Bachelor of Music in Vocal Performance degree provides the foundational training you need to perform in a variety of genres and discover your own unique style.
Throughout our vocal performance bachelor’s program, you will study one-on-one with our distinguished faculty members, who are committed to mentoring you as you further your vocal skills and enter the world of music performance. As one of the largest Christian universities in the world, our bachelor’s degree in vocal performance will prepare you to be a Champion for Christ in the music industry – wherever God calls you to perform.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s B.M. Degree in Vocal Performance? 
We are committed to providing you with the training you need to succeed in any career you choose in the music industry. As 1 of the top 10 largest schools of music in the nation, we offer a variety of classes and performance opportunities from opera workshops to our Chamber Singers ensemble. Our classrooms, rehearsal and recording spaces, as well as our performance facilities, are equipped with state-of-the-art equipment, all of which you have access to use throughout your time studying with us.
At Liberty, you will learn from faculty members who have earned their degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools and have performed around the world. They will teach, mentor, and guide you as you complete your degree.
What Will You Learn in Our Vocal Music Performance Bachelor’s Degree Program?
Throughout our bachelor’s degree in vocal performance, you will study harmonic theory, musicianship, music technology, and piano techniques so that you are prepared for a wide range of career opportunities in the music industry. You will work one-on-one with an instructor throughout your degree program to increase your vocal technique and performance skills as well as participate in a variety of choral ensembles.
To prepare you for more specialized vocal performance careers, you will take two semesters of opera and a foreign language, in addition to studying solo vocal literature and presenting a senior recital showcasing your vocal skills.
View our Vocal Performance Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 316 – Choral Conducting
MUSC 330 – Music Technology 1: Notation 
MUSC 408 – Vocal Pedagogy
Highlights of Our B.M. in Vocal Performance Degree Program
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction, and our graduates have found careers as musicians playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, well-known Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Our LU Praise choir has performed for the President of the United States and as one of the three choirs chosen to represent the American Choral Directors Association in China.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our School of Music’s professional music publishing and recording company, and this student-run label provides students, staff, and faculty with the opportunity to publish their work.
Participate in a variety of our School of Music ensembles that draw on folk and bluegrass, a cappella, and Latino styles."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/worship-leadership/","Help Your Congregation Draw Closer to God by Earning a Bachelor’s Degree in Music – Worship Leadership
The act of worshipping God through music is a necessary component in creating a spiritually healthy church and music ministry. The methods of how worship is conducted change with each decade, but the purpose and intent of worship does not. Leading God’s people in worship is a tremendous responsibility, but you don’t have to navigate this calling alone.
In our Bachelor of Music in Worship Leadership degree program, you will learn how to identify and minister to your congregation’s spiritual needs while furthering your skills as a musician. Partner with us, and let us help you become a Champion for Christ as you seek to serve God with your musical gifts. 
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor of Music in Worship Leadership Degree?
At Liberty, we are committed to providing you with the training you need to reach your full leadership potential in the area of worship. If you choose to pursue our Bachelor of Music degree program, you will study with respected musicians and worship leaders who have served in churches around the nation.
As one of the largest schools of music in the nation, we offer a variety of hands-on training and learning opportunities designed to prepare you for success in ministry. While here, you will have opportunities to work with LU Praise, our Liberty Worship Collective, and local churches as you develop your worship leadership skills.
What Will You Learn in Our B.M. in Worship Leadership Degree Program?
Throughout our worship leadership bachelor’s degree program, you will build foundational knowledge in music by studying topics like commercial music theory, conducting, and music arrangement. As a worship leader, you often need to be proficient in more than one instrument to lead your team. Therefore, you will have the opportunity to study a primary and secondary instrument.
You will also study the fundamentals of audio engineering, lighting, and staging as well as leadership within the church. A great benefit of this program is the hands-on experience you will gain by participating in our School of Music worship ensembles, completing practicums, and working with a church or ministry through an internship. 
Review our worship leadership Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 200 – Music, Art, Worship, and Culture
MUSC 303 – Dynamics of Leading Vocal Teams and Ensembles 
MUSC 323 – Leadership, Philosophy, Music, and Organization
MUSC 423 – Congregational Context and Leadership 
Highlights of Our Worship Leadership Bachelor’s Degree Program 
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction. Our graduates have found careers as well-known Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at churches like Harvest Bible Chapel, musicians playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
We offer the opportunity to join our Worship Collective and lead thousands of students, staff, and faculty in worship multiple times a week.
Our faculty members are distinguished musicians and worship leaders who have studied and served around the world.
Our School of Music is accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
From our distinguished LU Praise choir to bluegrass, a cappella, and Latino groups, our School of Music offers an ensemble that fits your style.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our School of Music’s professional music publishing and recording company. This student-run label provides students, staff, and faculty with the opportunity to publish their work."
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/2015/07/01/school-of-music-becomes-an-all-steinway-school-adding-124-new-pianos/","July 1, 2015 : By Office of Communications & Public Engagement 
On Wednesday, July 1, Liberty University received 67 Steinway & Sons pianos, the first delivery of a total of 124 new pianos that will arrive in two more shipments (this fall and next spring), to equip the School of Music’s new Center for Music and the Worship Arts, which will be open for classes this fall.
Liberty University School of Music faculty met with Steinway & Sons leaders at the piano manufacturer’s selection room last week in New York. 
The School of Music recently became an All-Steinway School, demonstrating that Liberty will only provide the highest quality pianos that the world has to offer. All-Steinway Schools are divided into three categories: conservatories, colleges and universities, and other schools of distinction. Currently, there are more than 170 All-Steinway Schools worldwide, spanning five continents. Liberty University is one of only 120 colleges and universities in America to hold this distinction.
Steinway pianos are known for their uncompromising standards for sound, touch, beauty, and value. They are the exclusive piano of choice of 98 percent of pianists performing with orchestras around the world, as well as more than 1,700 musicians who are designated Steinway Artists.
“The approval of Liberty University School of Music as an ‘All-Steinway’ institution is a major accomplishment for all involved,” said Dr. Vernon M. Whaley, dean of the School of Music. “Now, the entire arts community — the music professionals at sister institutions, the music industry, and artists, along with parents and students — can be assured those studying music on any level at Liberty University will have access to some of the finest piano instruments in the world.”
School of Music faculty visited Steinway’s selection room in New York last week where they tested and hand picked eight grand pianos for the university, including the 9-foot Model D Steinway Concert Grand, which will be featured on the stage of the new School of Music performing arts center. The visit and selection of pianos consummated the process and formalized Liberty’s status as an All-Steinway School.
The agreement with Steinway helps ensure that the equipment provided is on par with the school’s new state-of-the-art facility that, when complete next spring, will span two buildings and 141,000 square feet, offering 50 practice rooms, 43 teaching studios, three large common areas for group instruction and rehearsal, two recital halls, and a 1,600-seat fine arts auditorium."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/","Find Your Forte with a Degree in Music!
Pursue your passion for music education, performance, and worship with Liberty’s state-of-the-art and award-winning School of Music. Whether you aspire to be a singer/songwriter, music teacher, professional instrumentalist, or a worship leader, we have a degree program that will help take your talent to the next level!
There’s a common misconception that getting a degree in music will limit your career potential, but that doesn’t seem to be true for our students. We believe this stems from our dedication to helping you succeed. All of our music degrees focus on the current industry market.

Licensure requirements may vary by state. Please research your state’s licensure or reciprocity requirements here: https://www.liberty.edu/statelicensure/.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s School of Music?
If you’re hoping to become a professional musician, wouldn’t you want to have the best equipment and facilities at your disposal for your training? Wouldn’t you want to study at a university that has been rated as one of the best and largest music schools in the country? Liberty’s School of Music has all of this and more!
In addition to being a designated “All-Steinway” school, we offer the following facilities in our 141,000 square-foot Center for Music and the Worship Arts:
A 1,600 seat concert hall
1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio with professional-level recording equipment
280 seat instrumental rehearsal classroom
180 seat choral rehearsal classroom
Two general recital halls totaling 194 seats
Two state-of-the-art Mac labs
State of the art lighting and audio technology
In addition to our facilities, we are currently the nation’s seventh largest School of Music. We have been rated #1 Christian music school by Christian Universities Online, and our degrees are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM)! Walk away with a degree that strengthens your confidence and magnifies your musical abilities.
Joining one of our music programs gives you access to all of these facilities and the career opportunities that come with studying at our well-known and growing School of Music. Check out all of the degrees we offer below to find the perfect program for your unique career aspirations!
School of Music Programs
Bachelor’s Degrees
Master’s Degrees
Centers within the School of Music
Liberty’s School of Music consists of the following two departments:
The Center for Music Education and Performance – Designed to train and equip musicians as skilled performers and music education specialists.
The Center for Music and Worship – Designed to also train and equip highly skilled musicians, but to serve as worship practitioners and commercial musicians in the evangelical community.
The Center for Music and Worship also includes our commercial music degrees, where you will get hands-on, recording studio experience. Take a moment to discover all of the degree options offered through each of our School of Music departments.
The Center for Music Education and Performance
The Center for Music and Worship
Learn more about meeting requirements for licensure or certification in your state."
"https://www.liberty.edu/statelicensure/","Campus Online On-Campus 
School Select School 
Degree Program Select a Program 
State Select a State"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/commercial-music/","Prepare to Lead in the Music Industry with One of Our Bachelor’s Degrees in Commercial Music
Whether you’re interested in songwriting, music production, creating film scores, or developing as an artist, our Bachelor of Music (B.M.) in Commercial Music or Bachelor of Science (B.S.) in Commercial Music degree programs offer the theoretical and practical knowledge and training you need to prepare for success. Our goal with our B.M. and B.S. degrees is to partner with you so that you can create music that is well crafted and that embodies excellence in whatever musical style or genre speaks to you.
Take the next step in your music career and let us help you sharpen the skills you need to become a professional who leads in the music industry with excellence and integrity.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Commercial Music Degree? 
We are committed to providing you with the training that is central to many jobs in the music industry. As one of the nation’s largest music schools, we offer a variety of classes and opportunities designed to help you gain experience and share your work with the world. You may have opportunities to work with LU Praise and the Liberty Worship Collective as well as develop your own album or recordings in our state-of-the-art recording facilities.
If you are looking for a music engineering school, desire an audio production degree, or want to become a music artist, Liberty University can help equip you to pursue your goals. Our faculty members have earned their degrees from many of the most prestigious music schools in the nation, and they work to ensure you have the classroom environment you need to develop your musical style and skills."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/commercial-music/jazz-studies/","Create and Share the Music You Love with Our B.M. in Commercial Music – Jazz Studies Degree
Performing and preserving jazz music for future generations requires unique musical skills. Our Bachelor of Music in Commercial Music – Jazz Studies degree will equip you with special techniques for arranging, teaching, and performing jazz. Throughout this degree, you will learn the fundamentals of music production and audio, preparing you to record and produce jazz as well as perform and teach it.
Our mission is to Train Champions for Christ, and we want to help you develop the skills you need for a meaningful career in music. Partner with us and learn how to share the genre you love in a way that communicates the love and truth of Christ.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s of Commercial Music in Jazz Studies Degree?
We are committed to providing you with the training you need to succeed in the music industry. As one of the top ten largest schools of music in the nation, we offer a variety of classes and opportunities designed to help you gain experience and share your work with the world. While you are studying with us, you will have opportunities to work with LU Praise, our Liberty Worship Collective, and to develop your own album in our state-of-the-art recording facilities.
Many of our faculty members have earned their degrees from the most prestigious music schools in the nation, and they work to ensure you have the classroom environment you need to develop your own musical style and abilities.
What Will You Learn in Our B.M. in Commercial Music – Jazz Studies Degree Program?
Throughout our bachelor’s in commercial music degree program, you will learn the musical theories and techniques behind multiple music genres, along with the fundamentals of recording and producing commercial music. Our Bachelor of Music program is taught from a biblical worldview, allowing you to explore music as both art and worship. 
By earning our commercial music bachelor’s degree, you can prepare for a career as a singer, songwriter, or musician through hands-on classes, practicums, and internships. These opportunities will help you gain the experience you need to stand out.
If you choose to pursue our jazz studies’ specialization, you will study various jazz styles, important innovators, and how jazz has developed since its conception. You will learn how to arrange and teach jazz in ways that maintain the creative aspect of jazz, while still preserving and passing jazz on to future musicians. To further your experience, this program gives you the opportunity to perform with Liberty’s Jazz Ensemble and as a soloist in your junior and senior recitals.
Review our B.M. in Jazz Studies’ Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Read More
Featured Courses
MUSC 200 – Music, Art, Worship, and Culture
MUSC 327 – Jazz Styles and Analysis
MUSC 366 – Jazz Arranging 
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s of Commercial Music in Jazz Studies Degree Program 
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction. Our graduates have found careers as musicians playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, well-known Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Our professors are experienced artists and musicians, and they are dedicated to mentoring you and helping you develop your talents.
The Liberty University School of Music has strategic partnerships with leaders in the industry, such as Michael W. Smith. Each semester, the School of Music hosts industry professionals who share their expertise with current commercial music students and provide practical, hands-on experience for those pursuing their bachelor’s in commercial music.
You will have the opportunity to participate in our School of Music’s Jazz Ensemble."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/commercial-music/performance/","Develop Your Own Musical Style with Our Bachelor of Music in Commercial Music – Performance Degree
Becoming a Christian music artist is a unique calling, and our Bachelor of Music in Commercial Music – Performance degree offers the training you need to both develop your own music style and understand the industry. Throughout this degree, you will learn how to plan live performances, create a worshipful experience for your audience, and maintain integrity in the commercial music industry.
At Liberty, our mission is to Train Champions for Christ, and we want to help you use your talents to create artistic music that glorifies God – regardless of genre. Partner with us and make an impact in the commercial music industry.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s of Commercial Music in Performance Degree?
We are committed to providing the training you need to use your musical talents to glorify God. As one of the top ten largest schools of music in the nation, we offer a variety of classes and opportunities designed to help you gain experience and share your work with the world. During your time at Liberty, you will have opportunities to work with LU Praise, our Liberty Worship Collective, and develop your own album in our state-of-the-art recording facilities.
Our faculty members have earned their degrees from many of the most prestigious music schools in the nation, and they work to ensure you have the classroom environment you need to develop your own musical style and abilities.
What Will You Learn in Our B.M. in Commercial Music – Performance Degree Program?
Throughout our bachelor’s degree in commercial music, you can learn musical theories and techniques behind multiple music genres, along with the fundamentals of recording and producing commercial music. Our Bachelor of Music program is taught from a biblical worldview, allowing you to explore music as both art and worship. By earning this degree, you can prepare for a career as a singer, songwriter, or musician through hands-on classes, practicums, and internships that will help you gain the experience you need to stand out.
If you choose to pursue our performance specialization, you can work to develop your personal musical identity and philosophy. You can study the connection between music and culture, working to create art that reflects God’s love and truth. You can also learn how to plan a live performance and create an experience that blends both artistic and worshipful elements. You have been blessed with talent, and our bachelor’s in commercial music performance will teach you how to use your talents to create music that positively impacts the music industry and the world. 
Review our B.M. in Performance’s Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 200 – Music, Art, Worship, and Culture
MUSC 323 – Leadership, Philosophy, Music, and Organization
MUSC 373 – Artist Spiritual Formation
MUSC 379 – Artist Presentation 
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s of Commercial Music in Performance Degree Program 
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction. Our graduates have found careers as musicians playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, well-known Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Our School of Music’s latest LU Praise album has been nominated for a Dove Award.
The Liberty University School of Music has strategic partnerships with leaders in the industry, such as Michael W. Smith. Each semester, the School of Music hosts industry professionals who share their expertise with current commercial music students and provide practical, hands-on experience for those pursuing their bachelor’s in commercial music.
Participate in our School of Music ensembles that range from folk and bluegrass to a cappella and Latino styles."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/commercial-music/film-scoring/","Create the Next Epic Film Score with a Degree in Commercial Music: Film Scoring
You’re watching your favorite movie and at that critical part in the film, you’re filled with suspense, you explode in laughter, or you start sobbing. What is it that’s making you feel this way—giving you this emotional and physiological reaction to what’s happening on screen? It’s the music—the film score.
You understand that the right music played at the perfect moment in a film is what makes a movie great and allows you to feel the intended intensity. Are you excited about the idea of being the person who creates the score for a movie that ignites those feelings in others? If you’re saying “yes,” then Liberty University’s Bachelor of Music in Commercial Music: Film Scoring (Film and Media) degree may be the right fit for you!
Whether you want to be a conductor or composer, music director or supervisor, sound designer, or even a music licenser for films, this degree will prepare you for success. So don’t wait any longer! The film industry is ready for people like you who have passion, raw talent, and a world-class education. We’re going to partner with you to make sure you’re prepared with the knowledge and experience you need to excel in this field.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Commercial Music: Film Scoring Degree?
You’ll find that there are endless reasons to choose Liberty University to pursue your music degree. Our School of Music is one of the largest music schools in the nation. We have our very own on-campus recording and producing studio. Our program is accredited through the National Association of Schools of Music.
Our professors are professionals in the field of music. They have years of experience composing, conducting, songwriting, teaching, and more. They’ve received degrees from some of the most prestigious schools in the nation, and they’re excited about the opportunity to teach you—the next generation of musicians and leaders—while they mentor, guide, and support you throughout your academic journey with us.
Throughout this degree program, you’ll get hands-on experience both inside and outside the classroom. You’ll learn to use music composition software, as well as how to produce and record music. Additionally, you’ll participate in a required practicum and internship, both of which prepare you to join the music industry upon graduation.
What Will You Learn in Our Commercial Music: Film Scoring Degree?
The commercial music industry is rewarding and challenging, so that is why we’ve designed our curriculum to match the intensity of the profession. You will receive the practical knowledge and experience you need throughout your degree pursuit to be successful in the field of film scoring.
Throughout our commercial music degree, you’ll study topics like harmonic practices, musicianship, commercial music theory, music and audio production, music technology notation, and more.
If you choose to concentrate in film scoring, you’ll study:
Basic Conducting
Fundamentals of Music Publishing and Producing
Fundamentals of Sound Reinforcement
Music History (Antiquity – 1750)
Pro Tools Fundamentals I
Studio Producing, Mixing, and Audio Engineering
Review the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 105 – Harmonic Practices and Theory I
MUSC 218 – Fundamentals of Music Production and Audio
MUSC 360 – Commercial Improvisation Techniques
MUSC 372 – Entrepreneurship in the Christian Music Community
Highlights of Our Commercial Music: Film Scoring Degree
Access to 45 full-time faculty members with degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation.
Our music programs are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Our Center for Music Education and Performance is housed in a 141,000-square-foot building.
Our Center for Worship has been voted “Best of the Best in Higher Education” six years in a row by Worship Leader Magazine.
We are designated an “All-Steinway” school.
The Liberty University School of Music has strategic partnerships with leaders in the industry, such as Michael W. Smith. Each semester, the School of Music hosts industry professionals who share their expertise with current commercial music students and provide practical, hands-on experience for those pursuing their bachelor’s in commercial music.
Our alumni have gone on to become Dove-award winning Christian artists and songwriters
All coursework is market-driven and focuses on developing your skills for the current industry"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/commercial-music/recording-engineering-and-producing/","Develop Your Mixing Style with Our B.M. in Commercial Music – Recording, Engineering, and Producing Degree
You love engineering sound and creating innovative music. Our Bachelor of Music in Commercial Music – Recording, Engineering, and Producing degree can help you turn your passion into a career that impacts people around the world. We believe in equipping leaders who are dedicated to excellence and integrity, and our commercial music production degree program integrates a biblical worldview with hands-on training that prepares you for success in the music industry.
When you earn your B.M. in Commercial Music degree with us, you will learn how to create your own artistic style that reflects your personal faith – and share it with the world.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Commercial Music Recording, Engineering, and Producing?
We are committed to providing you with the training you need to succeed in the music industry. As 1 of the top 10 largest schools of music in the nation, we offer a variety of classes and opportunities designed to help you gain experience and share your work with the world. While you are studying with us, you will have opportunities to work with LU Praise, our Liberty Worship Collective, and to develop your own album in our state-of-the-art recording facilities.
Many of our faculty members have earned their degrees from the most prestigious music schools in the nation, and they work to ensure you have the classroom environment you need to develop your own musical style and skills.
What Will You Learn in Our B.M. in Commercial Music Recording, Engineering, and Producing Degree Program?
Throughout our bachelor’s in commercial music degree program, you will learn musical theories and techniques of multiple music genres, along with the fundamentals of recording and producing commercial music. Our Bachelor of Music program is taught from a biblical worldview, allowing you to explore music as both art and worship. You will also gain the experience you need to stand out in the music industry through hands-on classes, practicums, and internships.
If you choose to pursue our music recording, engineering, and producing degree specialization, you’ll learn how to create professional sound experiences both live and in the studio, culminating in an album-quality mix as your senior project.
In addition to studying the latest sound engineering and producing techniques, you will work to develop your own artistic style that integrates your personal faith with your love of music. By earning your bachelor’s degree in commercial music with us, you will be prepared to become a Champion for Christ in the music industry. 
Review our B.M. in Commercial Music Recording, Engineering, and Producing’s Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 200 – Music, Art, Worship, and Culture
MUSC 218 – Fundamentals of Music Production and Audio
MUSC 329 – Fundamentals of Sound Reinforcement
MUSC 463 – Music Mixing and Post Production 
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s of Commercial Music in Recording, Engineering, and Producing Degree Program 
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction. Our graduates have found careers as musicians playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, well-known Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Our bachelor’s in commercial music degrees are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Our professors are experienced artists and musicians, and they are dedicated to mentoring you and helping you develop your talents.
The Liberty University School of Music has strategic partnerships with leaders in the industry, such as Michael W. Smith. Each semester, the School of Music hosts industry professionals who share their expertise with current commercial music students and provide practical, hands-on experience for those pursuing their bachelor’s in commercial music.
Our LU Praise choir’s latest album has been nominated for a Dove award.
You will have the opportunity to perform with a variety of ensembles through our School of Music."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/commercial-music/publishing-and-producing/","Conduct Your Way to the Top with a Degree in Commercial Music: Publishing and Producing
Are you excited about the idea of becoming a professional in the commercial music industry? You probably have raw musical talent and a passion for the field. If this sounds like you, Liberty University’s Bachelor of Music in Commercial Music: Publishing and Producing degree may be the right fit for you!
When you pursue our degree in publishing and producing, you’ll receive the knowledge, skill, and practical, hands-on experience you need to excel in the commercial music industry. You’ll be ready to start your career upon graduation in areas like record production, audiovisual, artist management, music directing or coordinating, recording engineering, and music licensing.
So what are you waiting for? You’re a talented musician. You’re passionate about the field, and that’s what the music industry needs—people like you. We’re going to partner with you to provide the education you need to refine your talent and passion and turn it into a rewarding career.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Commercial Music: Publishing and Producing Degree?
Choosing Liberty means choosing excellence. By choosing our program, you’re choosing to study with one of the top music schools in the nation. You’re choosing a program that’s highly-respected and recognized by other institutions and employers, due to its accreditation through the National Association of Schools of Music. You’re choosing to learn from professional and degreed professors, gain hands-on experience, and excel in your market.
One of the best assets of our music program is our professors. You’ll have access to 45 full-time faculty members who each have professional experience in the music industry and have earned degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation. They are passionate about the field, and they’re even more passionate about teaching you—the next generation of leaders in the commercial music industry.
Another great aspect of our commercial music program is the hands-on experience you’ll receive. You’ll learn practical skills like conducting, and you’ll have the chance to practice your musical talents daily. Plus, you’ll get additional experience outside the classroom with the required practicum and internship, which will guarantee that you’ll be career-ready upon graduation.
What Will You Learn in Our Commercial Music: Publishing and Producing Degree?
We understand that the music industry is a rewarding but challenging field, and that’s why we’ve created a curriculum that will match that intensity. You’ll learn a lot while you’re here with daily music practice, practicums, an internship, and required extracurricular activities like concert attendance. You’re going to gain all the skills and knowledge you need to be a successful professional in the music industry.
With your major in commercial music, you’ll study topics like harmonic practices and theory, musicianship, commercial music theory, music production and audio, as well as the Christian music community as a whole.
If you choose to pursue our publishing and producing specialization, you’ll gain further practical knowledge in:
Basic Conducing
Fundamentals of Sound Reinforcement
Music History (Since 1750)
Music Publishing and Entrepreneurship
Principles of Audio Mixing and Production
Pro Tools Fundamentals I
Review the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 105 – Harmonic Practices and Theory I
MUSC 218 – Fundamentals of Music Production and Audio
MUSC 360 – Commercial Improvisation Techniques
MUSC 372 – Entrepreneurship in the Christian Music Community
Highlights of Our Commercial Music: Publishing and Producing Degree
Access to 45 full-time faculty members with degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation.
Our music programs are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Our Center for Music Education and Performance is housed in a 141,000-square-foot building.
Our Center for Worship has been voted “Best of the Best in Higher Education” six years in a row by Worship Leader Magazine.
We are designated an “All-Steinway” school.
The Liberty University School of Music has strategic partnerships with leaders in the industry, such as Michael W. Smith. Each semester, the School of Music hosts industry professionals who share their expertise with current commercial music students and provide practical, hands-on experience for those pursuing their bachelor’s in commercial music.
Our alumni have gone on to become Dove-award winning Christian artists and songwriters.
All coursework is market-driven and focuses on developing your skills for the current industry."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/bs-commercial-music/","Gain the Recording and Producing Skills You Need to Succeed in the Music Industry
Are you passionate about music and working with some of the latest technology in the industry? At Liberty, we have a degree that combines both of these interests, and it will equip you to work in the exhilarating world of music recording and studio production. Imagine being the first to hear a new album from a rising star — one that you helped create. 
Liberty’s B.S. in Commercial Music will provide you with the knowledge you need for both personal and professional success. Plus, our coursework in recording engineering and music technology will give you the edge so you can advance in the competitive industry of music production.
Additionally, a degree in commercial music can prepare you to perform your own pieces or direct music in a private school or center for the arts. Our bachelor’s degree in commercial music is designed to help you start your music career and land your dream job.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Commercial Music Bachelor’s Degree?
Choosing to earn a commercial music degree with Liberty can help you develop the marketable skills you’ll need to stand out in your field. Our School of Music is one of the largest in the nation, and that means we have the resources and facilities to provide you with the training you need to pursue your career with confidence upon graduation.
Our School of Music faculty knows the industry better than anyone. Learn from professors with years of professional experience in the commercial music industry. Our music degree provides a career-focused edge designed by your professors. Plus, you’ll have opportunities to work with LU Praise and the Liberty Worship Collective as well as develop your own album or recordings in our state-of-the-art facilities.
You will also gain invaluable market and entrepreneurial skills to succeed in a highly competitive field without compromising your faith. Our faculty come from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation, and they look forward to developing your musical skills and industry know-how to ensure that you are prepared for success.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s Degree in Commercial Music? 
Our commercial music bachelor’s degree will introduce you to all major areas of theory, techniques, and technology important for success in today’s music industry. Choosing to study with a nonprofit, Christian university also provides the opportunity for you to integrate faith into all areas of music expression and production.
As you apply musical style, literature, and theory research to commercial music, you will fine-tune your musical abilities. The knowledge you’ll gain in the classroom will be turned into wisdom from firsthand experience as you work alongside professionals in a commercial music organization through an internship. Let us support you while you advance your professional skills and set yourself apart from others in this competitive industry.
Other major topics you will explore in our B.S. in Commercial Music include:
A survey of popular and jazz music writers, influences, and trends
Computer applications in commercial music
Conducting
Entrepreneurship in the commercial music community
How to demonstrate technical fluency, expressiveness, and professionalism in commercial music performance
How to identify harmonic rhythm across various musical styles
Improvisation techniques
Songwriting, film scoring, recording, and mixing
Tonal center referencing
Featured Courses
CMUS 107 – Commercial Musicianship
CMUS 213 – Survey of Commercial Music Literature
CMUS 218 – Commercial Music Production and Audio
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s Degree in Commercial Music
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction. Our graduates have found careers as musicians playing for stars like Carrie Underwood and well-known Christian singers and songwriters, as worship leaders with churches like Harvest Bible Chapel, and as conductors leading choir music festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Our School of Music’s latest LU Praise album has been nominated for a Dove Award.
The Liberty University School of Music has strategic partnerships with leaders in the industry, such as Michael W. Smith. Each semester, the School of Music hosts industry professionals who share their expertise with current commercial music students and provide practical, hands-on experience for those pursuing their bachelor’s in commercial music.
Participate in our School of Music ensembles that range from folk and bluegrass to a cappella and Latino styles."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/commercial-music/songwriting/","Create Music that Matters with Our B.M. in Commercial Music – Songwriting Degree
Have you felt a calling to write innovative, inspired music that reflects God’s love and redemption? Do you have a desire to write music for television shows, commercials, or other genres? Our Bachelor of Music in Commercial Music – Songwriting degree will equip you with the skills you need to pursue your calling.
Here at Liberty, we believe music should be both artistic and worshipful, and our bachelor’s degree in commercial songwriting will give you the tools you need to achieve both. Our mission is to prepare you to lead with excellence and integrity in the music industry wherever God calls you – as a Christian singer and songwriter or as a writer of production music for television shows.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Commercial Music Songwriting?
We are committed to providing you with the training you need to succeed in the music industry. As 1 of the top 10 largest schools of music in the nation, we offer a variety of classes and opportunities designed to help you gain experience and share your work with the world. While you are studying with us, you will have opportunities to work with LU Praise, our Liberty Worship Collective, and to develop your own album in our state-of-the-art recording facilities.
Many of our faculty members have earned their degrees from the most prestigious music schools in the nation, and they work to ensure you have the classroom environment you need to develop your own musical style and skills.
What Will You Learn in Our B.M. in Commercial Music – Songwriting Degree Program?
Throughout our bachelor’s in commercial music degree program, you will learn the musical theories and techniques of multiple music genres, along with the fundamentals of recording and producing commercial music. Our Bachelor of Music program is taught from a biblical worldview, allowing you to explore music as both art and worship.
By earning our commercial music bachelor’s degree, you can prepare for your career as a songwriter through hands-on classes, practicums, and internships. These opportunities will help you build the experience you need to stand out.
If you choose to pursue our songwriting degree specialization, you will learn how to arrange music for different performance groups and circumstances, use current and emerging technology to shape sound, and develop your own musical style. You will not only learn basic songwriting principles but you will also work one-on-one with a professor who has real-world songwriting experience.
You will have opportunities to share and perform your original work throughout your degree program, but in your senior year, you will work with your instructor and classmates to create and perform music that showcases what you’ve learned.
Review our B.M. in Commercial Music Songwriting’s Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 200 – Music, Art, Worship, and Culture
MUSC 310 – Principles of Arranging 
MUSC 334 – Music Technology II: Sequencing 
MUSC 436 – Christian Music Industry Seminar 
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s of Commercial Music in Songwriting Degree Program 
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction. Our graduates have found careers as musicians playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, well-known Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Our bachelor’s in commercial music degrees are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Our professors are experienced artists and musicians, and they are dedicated to mentoring you and helping you develop your talents.
The Liberty University School of Music has strategic partnerships with leaders in the industry, such as Michael W. Smith. Each semester, the School of Music hosts industry professionals who share their expertise with current commercial music students and provide practical, hands-on experience for those pursuing their bachelor’s in commercial music.
Our LU Praise choir’s latest album has been nominated for a Dove award.
You will have the opportunity to perform with a variety of ensembles through our School of Music."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/guitar-performance/","Prepare for Your Dream Career with Our B.M. Degree in Guitar Performance 
Playing the guitar is your passion, and you might be interested in incorporating this passion into a future career. Our Bachelor of Music in Guitar Performance degree can help you further your technical and performance skills so you can be prepared to pursue job opportunities in many areas of the music industry.
You will study core curriculum in harmonic practices and theory, commercial music, orchestration, and music history. As you get into the core guitar performance courses in this degree, you’ll have the opportunity to participate in ensembles with our worship choir, University Chorale, and Concert Choir. These opportunities provide hands-on experience creating music with others, preparing you for a variety of jobs like performing with an orchestra or entering the recording industry.

Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s B.M. in Guitar Performance Degree? 
At Liberty, we are committed to providing you with the training you need to succeed in a career in the music industry while honoring God with your musical talents. Throughout our guitar performance bachelor’s degree, you learn from experienced musicians who have earned their degrees from some of the best music schools around the world. Our professors are dedicated to mentoring you as you develop your own musical style and prepare for your career.
When you earn your bachelor’s degree in guitar performance with us, you are enrolling in a program designed to help you reach your full potential as a musician who leads with excellence and integrity. And as one of the top ten largest schools of music in the nation, we are able to offer a variety of classes and performance opportunities from jazz to worship ensembles. We also offer state-of-the-art classroom, performance, and recording facilities designed to help you prepare for your career.
What Will You Learn in Our Guitar Performance Bachelor’s Degree Program?
Throughout our bachelor’s degree in music, you will study music theory, applied music studies, conducting, music technology, improvisation studies, and contemporary styles survey. You will also have the opportunity to work one-on-one with a distinguished instructor to further your technical guitar skills as well as study piano as a secondary instrument.
During your time studying with us, you can participate in various ensemble performances and showcase your accomplishments in a senior recital. To help you gain a variety of hands-on experiences, you will also complete an internship with the music organization of your choice. You will graduate with the technique, skills, and performance capabilities required for a successful career in music.
View our guitar performance Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 200 – Music, Art, Worship, and Culture
MUSC 310 – Principles of Arranging
MUSC 360 – Commercial Improvisation Techniques
MUSC 372 – Entrepreneurship and the Christian Music Community 
Highlights of Our B.M. in Music Performance – Woodwind, Brass, or Percussion Degree
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction, and our graduates have found careers playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, as Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Our School of Music is accredited by NASM.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our School of Music’s professional music publishing and recording company, and this student-run label provides students, staff, and faculty with the opportunity to publish their work.
Our faculty members are experienced musicians who have studied and performed all over the world."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/","You Have Never Been Closer to a Career in Music and Worship than Now
Prepare for an exciting career in the worship arts! Become equipped with the leadership tools you need to guide and manage and the collaboration skills you need to create unity within the church. If you want to be a part of shaping tomorrow’s music culture, start with a bachelor’s degree in music and worship from Liberty.
Our students and alumni are making some noise in the professional music industry. Our vocalists continue to win state and regional competitions, our LU Praise team’s latest album is nominated for a Dove award.
Earn a degree in music and worship that takes you further. Our students’ success comes from the care provided by our highly trained faculty, our state-of-the-art equipment and facilities, and our passion to put God first and do everything for His glory. Be a part of a university that sharpens your talents and skills for the career you have ahead.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Music and Worship Bachelor’s Degree?
Partner with Liberty to get the hands-on experience and career opportunities you need to make a difference! Our award-winning School of Music offers various ways for you to get involved and develop your talent.
As the nation’s seventh-largest school of music, we offer students like you the following resources:
Our recording studio and Liberty Music Group (LMG) publishing company.
Our Center for Music and the Worship Arts building, which contains a 1,600 seat concert hall, state of the art lighting and audio technology, various rehearsal halls and classrooms, and 2 state-of-the-art Mac labs.
45 full-time degreed faculty excited to share their industry expertise!
It’s also important to note that by attending Liberty you will be studying in a School of Music that is:
Accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Designated as an “All-Steinway” school.
Providing students with opportunities to compete in state and regional competitions, perform at events such as the ACDA National Convention and Inaugural Prayer Service, and produce albums that have been nominated for various Dove awards.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s Degree in Music and Worship?
Develop your musical skills and become a biblically grounded worship leader. Your general courses will develop your creativity, collaboration, and conducting abilities. If you choose to specialize in one of our eight cognates below, you will study additional key areas of interest. If you pursue our general track, you will have some flexibility to mix and match elective courses.
Today’s music ministers and worship leaders need to be more than skilled musicians. Our bachelor’s in music and worship will develop your teaching, training, team management and discipleship, worship evangelism, marketing, technology, drama, and music skills! Become well rounded in all aspects of worship so that you can be your very best in the career God has called you to.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 105 – Harmonic Practices and Theory I
MUSC 107 – Musicianship I
MUSC 201 – Creative Worship
MUSC 315 – Basic Conducting
Biblical Studies
Business
Pastoral Leadership
Women’s Leadership
Worship Technology (Audio)
Youth Ministries"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/business/","Develop a Business Sense for the Music Industry with a Degree in Music and Worship: Business
Are you excited about the idea of turning your musical talent into a career? Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Music and Worship degree, with a specialization in business, provides the training you need to pursue careers in music and worship that will be personally, spiritually, and financially fulfilling.
With a bachelor’s degree in music and worship, you’ll have plenty of opportunities to find the job of your dreams. You might be considered for positions like the director of music or worship programs, worship leader, worship minister, or even a contemporary Christian artist! Plus, your business concentration will give you additional insight into how businesses work—maybe you’ll open your own music label or store one day.
So what are you waiting for? You’re passionate about music and career possibilities. The music industry needs people like you. We’re going to partner with you and provide the training, experience, and education you need to enjoy a fruitful career as a musician.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Music and Worship: Business Degree?
We are proud of the fact that our School of Music is one of the top music schools in the nation. When you study music at Liberty, you’re getting access to experienced and professional faculty members, market-driven coursework, and regular in-class experience. You’re getting an education that’s highly-rated among other schools and employers because we’re accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM). We’re excited about the opportunity to share more with you about why you should choose our School of Music.
So let’s start here: our professors. You’ll have access to 45 full-time music professors. These men and women are professionals in their field with real-life experience working in the music industry. They have graduated from some of the most prestigious music schools across the nation. And the best part? They’re excited about teaching you—the next generation of musicians—as they mentor, guide, and support you while you’re studying with us.
Each of our music courses is market-focused, meaning we have implemented training that is relevant to the current trends and practices of the music industry. Many of our alumni have gone on to become Dove-award winning musicians.
What Will You Learn in Our Music and Worship: Business Degree?
With all of our music degrees at Liberty University, we work to ensure that you receive the knowledge, skills, and resources you need to pursue a fulfilling career in music after graduation. Throughout our music and worship degree, you’ll study the basics and intricacies of music. Some of your courses will cover topics like harmonic practices and theory, musicianship, creative worship, commercial music theory, music production, basic conducting, and leadership skills.
If you pursue the business concentration of our music and worship degree, you’ll gain additional insight into the management and leadership principles you’ll need from courses like:
Legal and Ethical Concepts for Decision Makers
Financial Accounting
Principles of Management
Principles of Marketing
Review the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 105 – Harmonic Practices and Theory I
MUSC 107 – Musicianship I
MUSC 201 – Creative Worship
MUSC 315 – Basic Conducting
Highlights of Our Music and Worship: Business Degree
Access to 45 full-time faculty members with degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation.
Our music programs are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Our Center for Music Education and Performance is housed in a 141,000-square-foot building.
Our Center for Worship has been voted “Best of the Best in Higher Education” six years in a row by Worship Leader Magazine
We are designated an “All-Steinway” school.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our very own on-campus recording studio and professional music publishing and recording company.
Our alumni have gone on to become Dove-award winning Christian artists and songwriters.
All coursework is market-driven and focuses on developing your skills for the current industry."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/pastoral-leadership/","Lead with Passion and Integrity Using a Music and Worship Degree from Liberty
Your ambition can drive you to serve the Lord in ways you never imagined. If your passion and talent lie in music, why not pursue a career that takes that natural ability further? With Liberty, you can earn a bachelor’s degree in music and worship that focuses on pastoral leadership, so that you can be prepared to use your passions and lead with integrity.
Our pastoral leadership specialization is intended for students who want to lead within the church. If you want to work with family ministries, church planting and organization, or staff management and relations, this focus will be very useful for you. Our courses are designed to prepare you to confidently guide and shepherd your congregation in becoming more effective for Christ.
We have resources, facilities, and trained professors standing by to make your ministry dreams a reality, so why wait? Get started with our music and worship program today and serve God in a big way.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Music and Worship – Pastoral Leadership Degree?
If you choose Liberty to pursue your B.S. in Music and Worship, be prepared for a new level of academic excellence and experiential learning. Our team of music faculty and professors are excited to share with you their wealth of experience as you become skilled and knowledgeable in all areas of music and worship ministry. 
Wondering what makes our program stand out? Here are some of the major benefits and resources you will receive by studying with us:
Our School of Music is the 7th largest in the nation
Various centers, practice rooms, and Mac labs at your disposal
Our Center for Worship has been voted “Best of the Best in Higher Education” 6 years in a row by Worship Leader Magazine
We offer our very own on-campus recording studio: Liberty Music Group (LMG)
You deserve a program that invests in you. With industry leaders as your professors, state-of-the-art equipment at your fingertips, and successful alumni whose examples you can follow, your path to success is paved for you. Partner with Liberty and see how far your ministry goals can take you.
What Will You Learn in Our Pastoral Leadership Focused Music and Worship Degree?
By focusing your degree in pastoral leadership, you will complete courses in the following areas of study:
Foundations in pastoral leadership
Family ministry in local church settings
Staff management and relations
Church assimilation and development
Homiletics
These courses are designed to help you evaluate your role as a leader in the church. From pre-marital counseling to creating a solid missional statement, this concentration will develop the skills you’ll need to rise to leadership roles and create more effective ministries.
Aside from the pastoral leadership courses, our music and worship degree includes ensemble courses, practicums, and internships. These opportunities provide you with the ability to put your talent to the test in real-world worship and pastoral leadership settings. You will also gain a strong foundational knowledge in harmonic practices and theory, musicianship, creative worship, music production, audio engagement, basic conducting, and worship choir.
Review the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
PLED 201 – Foundation to Pastoral Leadership
PLED 301 – Family Ministry in the Church
MUSC 105 – Harmonic Practices and Theory I
MUSC 107 – Musicianship I
Highlights of Our Music and Worship – Pastoral Leadership Degree
You will have access to 45 full-time faculty members with degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation.
Our music programs are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Our Center for Music and Performance is housed in a 141,000-square-foot building.
Our Center for Worship has been voted “Best of the Best in Higher Education” six years in a row by Worship Leader Magazine.
We are designated an “All-Steinway” school. 
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our very own on-campus recording studio and professional music publishing and recording company.
Our alumni have gone on to become Dove-award winning Christian artists and songwriters.
All coursework is market-driven and focuses on developing your skills for the current industry."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/biblical-studies/","Become Influential in Your Worship Ministry with Liberty’s B.S. in Music and Worship
Your passion for music and desire to serve the Lord can lead to an exciting career worth pursuing. Whether you feel called to lead worship in a church or become the director of worship programming for a non-profit, Christian organization, we can help. Our B.S. in Music and Worship with a biblical studies focus can propel your ministry further.
Focusing your degree on biblical studies is a great way to learn how to interpret, apply, and present biblical passages. Imagine standing in front of your congregation, piano music fading behind you. Before you lead into the next song, you confidently deliver a passage of Scripture that puts a spotlight on the awesomeness of our God. Make that picture a reality by studying the Bible in a worship context with us!
Our vision centers on Training Champions for Christ. We want to help raise up leaders like you in every sphere of influence, including religion and media. In fact, some of our students have gone on to become published, award-winning Christian artists. Our award-winning facilities and prestigious faculty can help you make a lasting impact on today’s culture. 
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Music and Worship – Biblical Studies Degree?
Your worship ministry is important to us. Thanks to our incredible faculty, state-of-the-art facilities, and dedicated students, we believe we have the best Christian music and worship degrees out there! Choosing Liberty means partnering with our successful School of Music so you can do more with your ministry.
Award-Winning Facilities and Prestigious Programs
By pursuing your music degree on campus, you will have incredible resources at your disposal.
Our music and worship students use state-of-the-art training rooms and equipment in our 141,000-square-foot School of Music building.
We are a designated “All-Steinway” school.
Worship Leader Magazine has voted our Center for Worship “Best of the Best in Higher Education” for six years in a row.
We know earning an accredited degree is important to you. Our music programs are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM). Choosing Liberty means choosing quality academics and musical training you can be confident about.
Successful Faculty Foster Student Success
Not only will you be studying at one of the largest music schools in the nation, but you will also receive hands-on training from experienced industry professionals. Gain access to 45 full-time faculty members who hold degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the country. Work hand-in-hand as you use professional recording studios and our Liberty Music Group (LMG) professional publishing label. 
All of the coursework taught by your professors is market-driven. Your classes will focus on developing skills vital to the current industry. Some of our alumni have gone on to become award-winning Christian artists and songwriters!
What Will You Learn in Our Biblical Studies Focused Music and Worship Degree?
Biblical Studies Concentration
Pursuing a biblical studies focus in our B.S. in Music and Worship can help you become more specialized in your career field as you the Old and New Testaments in order to prepare you for a more holistic approach to biblical interpretation and application to your worship ministry. Learn how to conduct inductive and expositional studies of various passages so that you can present messages that accompany your worship and music.
Music and Worship Core Courses
Our music and worship curriculum provides the training and experience you’ll need to be successful in your field. Our general music and worship courses focus on cultivating your worship teaching and training, team management and discipleship, worship evangelism, marketing, technology, drama, and music skills! You will also complete ensemble courses, practicums, and internships, which allow you to put your talent to the test in real-world worship settings.
Review the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
BIBL 324 – Pastoral Epistles and Leadership Development
BIBL 350 – Inductive Bible Study
MUSC 105 – Harmonic Practices and Theory I
MUSC 107 – Musicianship I
Highlights of Our Music and Worship – Biblical Studies Degree
Access to 45 full-time faculty members with degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation.
Our music programs are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Our Center for Music and Performance is housed in a 141,000-square-foot building.
Our Center for Worship has been voted “Best of the Best in Higher Education” six years in a row by Worship Leader Magazine.
We are designated as an “All-Steinway” school.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our very own on-campus recording studio and professional music publishing and recording company.
Our alumni have gone on to become Dove-award winning Christian artists and songwriters.
All coursework is market-driven and focuses on developing your skills for the current industry."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/womens-leadership/","Lead Women through the Power of Music with a Degree in Music and Worship – Women’s Leadership
Do you love music? Are you passionate about women’s ministries? If so, you may want to consider Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Music and Worship – Women’s Leadership degree. This program provides you with opportunities to hone your talent as a musician while also developing leadership skills you can use in women’s ministries.
We know you’re excited about what this degree will teach you, but you’re probably wondering what you can do with it. You’ll have multiple opportunities for positions in the music industry, including becoming the director of a music or worship program, a worship leader, a worship minister, or even a contemporary Christian music artist.
So don’t wait any longer! The music industry and women’s ministries around the world are desperate for people like you who are passionate about leading women and producing great music. We’re going to partner with you to ensure that you have all the training you’ll need to be successful in this field.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Music and Worship – Women’s Leadership Degree?
Choosing Liberty University’s music program means you’re choosing to get personal and unique training from some of the 45 full-time music faculty members on campus. You’re choosing to attend a program that is widely revered in the music industry and accredited through the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM). You’re choosing hands-on experience opportunities. We can’t wait to share with you what else you’re choosing when you choose Liberty.
Let’s start with our professors. These men and women are professionals in their field with years of experience. They’ve received degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools around the country. And the best part? They’re excited about the opportunity to train you—the next generation of musicians and leaders—while they mentor and guide you throughout your academic journey.
Some other great benefits about our music and worship program are the fact that we have our own recording studio on campus—the Liberty Music Group. Plus, each of your courses are market-driven and aimed at preparing you for what the current industry is looking for. Many of our alumni have gone on to become Dove-award winning music artists, leaders in church worship teams, and songwriters.
What Will You Learn in Our Music and Worship – Women’s Leadership Degree?
At Liberty University, our music curriculum provides the training and experience you’ll need to be successful in a career in music and worship. You’ll gain hands-on, practical experience by participating in a practicum and internship towards the end of your degree.
Throughout our music and worship degree, you’ll study subjects like harmonic practices and theory, musicianship, creative worship, fundamentals of music production and audio engagement, basic conducting, and worship choir.
If you choose to pursue our women’s leadership specialization, you’ll receive additional training and insight in the leadership of women’s ministries. The courses you’ll study include:
Leadership and Management in Ministry
Methods of Teaching the Bible and Communication Skills for Women
Spiritual Formation and Development for Women in Leadership
The Role of Christian Women in Ministry
Survey of Women’s Ministries
Review the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 105 – Harmonic Practices and Theory I
MUSC 107 – Musicianship I
MUSC 201 – Creative Worship
MUSC 315 – Basic Conducting
Highlights of Our Music and Worship – Women’s Leadership Degree
Access to 45 full-time faculty members with degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation.
Our music programs are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Our Center for Music Education and Performance is housed in a 141,000-square-foot building.
Our Center for Worship has been voted “Best of the Best in Higher Education” six years in a row by Worship Leader Magazine.
We are designated an “All-Steinway” school.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our very own on-campus recording studio and professional music publishing and recording company.
Our alumni have gone on to become Dove-award winning Christian artists and songwriters.
All coursework is market-driven and focuses on developing your skills for the current industry."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/youth-ministry/","Train Up the Next Generation with Your Passion for Worship and Ministry 
Unleash your love for music and be a positive influence on the next generation of young men and women. At Liberty, we offer a B.S. in Music and Worship that specializes in youth ministry. Whether you want to become a worship leader for a local youth camp, or plan programs and events for your church’s youth group, our degree will help equip you for success in your ministry endeavors.
As a Liberty music and worship student, you will gain access to our School of Music, which includes all of our experienced professors, resources, and facilities. You deserve to hone your musical ability with the best instruments and equipment. We even have our own recording and publishing company to help you get the most out of your music degree!
Your future in worship and youth ministry is waiting. Partner with our nonprofit, Christian university to experience award-winning facilities and one of the nation’s largest schools of music.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Music and Worship – Youth Ministry Degree?
Choosing Liberty to pursue your bachelor’s degree means partnering with a school that has the tools to prepare you for your career with confidence and integrity. From our incredible team of faculty to our beautiful, state-of-the-art facilities, we have what you need to stand out and lead effectively.
Award-Winning Facilities
Within our School of Music building, you will gain access to various rehearsal, concert, and recital halls. All of our centers and classrooms are fitted with the best industry equipment. In fact, we are a designated “All-Steinway” school and our Center for Worship ranked “Best of the Best in Higher Education” for 6 years in a row by Worship Leader Magazine.
Prestigious Academics Taught by Expert Faculty
All of our music and worship degrees are accredited by the National Association of School of Music (NASM). This means you will walk away with credentials recognized by employers and churches across the nation. 
We believe the caliber of education and the success of our students is due to the incredible team of professors and faculty in our School of Music department. When you choose Liberty, you are gaining personal, one-on-one training and instruction from our 45 full-time faculty members. These men and women are professionals in their field with years of real-life experience, and degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation.
What Will You Learn in Our Youth Ministry Focused Music and Worship Degree?
Our music and worship youth ministry specialization presents a detailed overview of methods to reach young people where they are. Our courses delve into strategies for both establishing and maintaining ministry with adolescents. This includes understanding the culture and core values of young people in North America. Furthermore, our courses will address social issues critical to engaging youth and creating effective outreach programs.
Our music and worship degree includes ensemble courses, practicums, and internships. These give you the opportunity to put your talents and training to the test in real-world worship settings. You will also gain a strong foundational knowledge in harmonic practices and theory, musicianship, creative worship, music production, audio engagement, basic conducting, and worship choir.
Review the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 105 – Harmonic Practices and Theory I
MUSC 107 – Musicianship I
YOUT 201 – Survey of Youth Ministries 
YOUT 220 – Global Youth Culture
Highlights of Our Music and Worship – Youth Ministry Degree
Access to 45 full-time faculty members with degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation.
Our music programs are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Our Center for Music and Performance is housed in a 141,000-square-foot building.
Our Center for Worship has been voted “Best of the Best in Higher Education” six years in a row by Worship Leader Magazine.
We are designated as an “All-Steinway” school.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our very own on-campus recording studio and professional music publishing and recording company.
Our alumni have gone on to become Dove-award winning Christian artists and songwriters.
All coursework is market-driven and focuses on developing your skills for the current industry."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/worship-technology-audio/","Encourage Believers Around the World Through Music with Our B.S. in Music and Worship – Audio Technology Degree
In a worship ministry, there are many seen and unseen positions working simultaneously to create a seamless and distraction-free experience for a congregation or concert/conference attendees. Sound engineers support music and worship ministries by incorporating sound, media, and lighting into the worship experience. While most sound engineers work behind the scenes, their contribution to the worship experience is crucial.
Our Bachelor of Science in Music and Worship – Worship Technology Audio degree will help you develop your team management and audio technology skills in addition to growing as a musician. You will learn how to record, edit, and produce music so your church can share original worship songs and arrangements with people around the world. God has a special call on your life, and we want to help you reach your full potential as a Champion for Christ in your worship ministry.

Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Music and Worship –Worship Technology Audio Degree?
At Liberty, we are committed to providing you with the training and hands-on experience you need to reach your full potential as a musician, worship leader, and sound engineering specialist. Throughout our bachelor’s degree in music and worship program, you will study with respected musicians who have served in churches across the nation.
As 1 of the top 10 largest schools of music in the nation, we offer a variety of hands-on training opportunities designed to provide you with the experience you need to succeed in ministry. While here, you can work with LU Praise, our Liberty Worship Collective, and local churches as you develop your worship technology skills.
What Will You Learn in Our Worship Technology – Audio Bachelor’s Degree?
Throughout our bachelor’s degree in music and worship, you will build foundational knowledge in harmonic practices and theory, musicianship, creative worship, music production, audio engagement, basic conducting, and worship choir. If you choose to pursue our audio technology specialization, you will focus your studies on recording, editing, and producing music.
As a Liberty student, you can apply the skills you gain in creating and publishing your own music with our Liberty Music Group (LMG). You can also gain hands-on training experience by participating in some of our worship ensembles, completing practicums, and interning with a local church.
Review our worship technology Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
DIGI 175 – Fundamentals of Editing
DIGI 337 – Music Recording 
MUSC 105 – Harmonic Practices and Theory I
MUSC 107 – Musicianship I
Highlights of Our B.S. in Music and Worship – Technology: Audio Degree
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction. Our graduates have found careers as well-known Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at churches like Harvest Bible Chapel, musicians playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Our faculty members are distinguished musicians with degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation.
You will have the opportunity to serve with the Liberty Worship Collective and lead thousands in worship multiple times a week.
Our School of Music programs are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Our Center for Worship has been voted “Best of the Best in Higher Education” six years in a row by Worship Leader Magazine.
We are designated an “All-Steinway” school.
Our alumni have gone on to become Dove-award-winning Christian artists and songwriters."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/choral-music/","Use Music to Inspire Your Students with Our Bachelor’s Degree in Choral Music Education
As a future music teacher, you have the unique opportunity and responsibility to speak into the lives of your students. Our Bachelor of Music (B.M.) in Music Education – Choral degree is designed to give you the foundational knowledge you need to teach music from a biblical worldview.
Throughout this choral music degree program, you will learn how to arrange music for choral performances, direct a choral ensemble, and help your students improve their vocal performance. When you earn your degree from one of the leading Christian universities in the world, you will learn how to use music as a medium to inspire your students and make an impact on their lives for eternity.
Licensure requirements may vary by state. Please research your state’s licensure or reciprocity requirements here: https://www.liberty.edu/statelicensure/.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s B.M. in Choral Music Education Degree? 
We are committed to providing you with the training you need to use your musical talents to glorify God. We offer state-of-the-art classrooms, rehearsal, recording, and performance facilities where you can gain the practical experience you need for your career.
Our faculty members have earned their degrees from many of the most prestigious music schools in the nation, and they work to ensure you have the classroom environment you need to develop your musical style and skills. As 1 of the top 10 largest schools of music in the nation, we offer a variety of classes and performance opportunities from our LU Praise choir to Libertad – a praise band that utilizes the Latino style.
What Will You Learn in Our Choral Music Education Bachelor’s Degree Program?
Throughout our B.M. in Music Education – Choral program, you will study many foundational aspects of music as well as apply what you learn to real-world performance and teaching situations. Beginning with harmonic practices and theory, you will take music classes that focus on theory and methodology, such as basic conducting and music technology. You will also have opportunities to participate in ensemble performances as well as study both a primary and secondary instrument.
Equally important to your B.M. degree are the teacher-licensure classes, where you will learn teaching methods and gain experience in elementary, middle, and high school classrooms. You will also learn how to teach vocal performance under the guidance of a professor from the School of Music.
View our Bachelor of Music in Music Education – Choral’s Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 200 – Music, Art, Worship, and Culture
MUSC 316 – Choral Conducting 
MUSC 330 – Music Technology 1: Notation 
MUSC 413 – Vocal Pedagogy for Music Education 
Highlights of Our B.M. in Music Education – Choral Degree
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction. Our graduates have found careers as musicians playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, well-known Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Our LU Praise choir has performed for the President of the United States and as one of three choirs chosen to represent the American Choral Directors Association in China.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our School of Music’s professional music publishing and recording company. This student-run label provides students, staff, and faculty with the opportunity to publish their work.
Participate in a variety of our School of Music ensembles that draw on folk and bluegrass, a cappella, and Latino styles."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/instrumental-music/","Inspire the Next Generation of Musicians with a Music Education Degree
Are you a musician who is excited about sharing your talent and passion for music with young people? If that sounds like you, Liberty University’s Bachelor of Music in Music Education with a specialization in instrumental music may be the degree for you!
This degree program provides an avenue for you to both perfect your talents as a musician and gain the necessary knowledge and experience you need to teach others. Our program provides you with teaching licensure, which allows you to start teaching immediately after graduation.
So what are you waiting for? There is a new generation of young people who are excited about music and need guidance from an expert like you.
Your passion and talent, combined with our challenging and rewarding program, will ensure that you can pursue a successful career in music education.
Licensure requirements may vary by state. Please research your state’s licensure or reciprocity requirements here: https://www.liberty.edu/statelicensure/.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s B.M. in Music Education – Instrumental Degree?
Choosing to pursue your music degree at Liberty University means you’re choosing a program that is highly revered and accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM). You’ll have access to state-of-the-art equipment as well as instruction and mentorship from caring and professional faculty members.
Our professors are professional musicians with years of experience teaching and training others. They all hold advanced music degrees and are committed to teaching and guiding you along your academic journey.
Another great benefit of this degree program is the hands-on training experience you will gain. Many of your courses are like practice and coaching sessions, which allow you to perfect your musical talents and understanding of best practices in the field of education. Additionally, you’ll participate in student teaching to ensure you’re ready to take on a classroom of your own before you graduate.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor of Music in Music Education – Instrumental Degree?
By challenging yourself with a music education degree from Liberty University, you’re setting yourself up for a successful career as either a musical artist or music teacher. We have created a curriculum that provides both practical training and countless hours of hands-on practice and experiences so that you are career-ready upon graduation.
Some of what you’ll study in our music education degree includes harmonic practices and theory, musicianship, chromatic harmony, commercial music, music history, and conducting. Additionally, you’ll take ensemble and applied music studies courses, which you have the flexibility to choose, based on your interest and skill set.
This concentration focuses on some of the following areas of study:
Brass Techniques
Instructional Pedagogy Lab for Music Education
Instrumental Conducting
Music Technology I: Notation
Principles of Arranging
In addition to these courses, you will participate in student teaching to gain your teacher licensure before your graduate.
Review the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 310 – Principles of Arranging
MUSC 317 – Instrumental Conducting
MUSC 363 – Percussion Techniques
MUSC 374 – String Techniques
Highlights of Our Instrumental Music Education Degree
Access to 45 full-time faculty members with degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation
Our music programs are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM)
Our Center for Music Education and Performance is housed in a 141,000-square-foot building
Our Center for Worship has been voted “Best of the Best in Higher Education” six years in a row by Worship Leader Magazine
We are designated an “All-Steinway” school 
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our very own on-campus recording studio and professional music publishing and recording company
Our alumni have gone on to become Dove-award winning Christian artists and songwriters
All coursework is market-driven and focuses on developing your skills for the current industry"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/ethnomusicology","Connect with Cultural Communities Around the World with Our B.M. in Music in World Cultures Degree
You love music because music is about community. Our Bachelor of Music in Music in World Cultures will help you develop the skills you need to study and explore music in communities and cultures around the world. You will grow as a musician while exploring these unique musical communities.
Through extensive training in music theory, performance, worship leadership, and global studies, our bachelor’s degree in music in world cultures will equip you with the skills you need to engage a variety of cultural communities for Christ.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor of Music Degree in Music in World Cultures? 
At Liberty, we are committed to training musicians who use their talent to glorify God and love others. That’s why our B.M. in Music in World Cultures program integrates global studies and musical theory with a biblical worldview, so you can build the foundational knowledge you need to follow God’s calling on your life.
Whether you want to lead culturally inclusive worship, become an ethnomusicologist, or serve as a missionary, this degree will equip you with the tools you need to reach your full potential. Partner with us and become the Champion for Christ you always knew you could be.
What Will You Learn in Our B.M. in Music in World Cultures Degree Program?
In our B.M. in Music in World Cultures program, you will study music theory, harmonic practice, musicianship, and music history giving you the broad foundational knowledge you need for the rest of your degree. You will explore non-western and folk music theory, learn to create a global worship setting, and gain practical commercial production skills. And during your global studies classes, you will learn how to interact and communicate with other cultures, so you are prepared to build a career exploring and sharing ethnic music at home or around the world.
Our B.M. in Music in World Culture program also offers opportunities to gain hands-on experience through ensemble performances and showcasing your work in a senior recital. You can also complete an internship, which provides networking opportunities and experience in the field.
View our music in world cultures Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
GLST 200 – Introduction to Global Studies
MUSC 200 – Music, Art, Worship, and Culture
MUSC 402 – Ethnic Music Theory
MUSC 424 – Arts in Global Outreach
Highlights of Our B.M. in Music in World Cultures Degree Program
Our music degrees are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Use our state-of-the-art, $2.2 million recording studio and Liberty Music Group (LMG) publishing company to bring your songs to life.
We are a designated “All Steinway” school.
Rated #1 Christian music school by Christian Universities Online.
We are currently the nation’s seventh largest school of music.
You will have access to 45 full-time faculty who hold degrees from Liberty University and other prestigious music schools in the nation.
Our students have produced albums that have been nominated for awards, with Liberty alumni going on to become Dove-award winning Christian artists and songwriters.
Participate in one of our School of Music ensembles that draw on styles ranging from a cappella, jazz, and Latino to folk and bluegrass."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/music-instrumental/","Build the Foundation You Need For Success with Our B.S. in Music Instrumental Degree
You want a music degree that prepares you for future job opportunities and ministries. Our Bachelor of Science in Music Instrumental program combines hands-on learning from distinguished instructors with a wide variety of performance opportunities and free electives, allowing you to tailor your music degree to the career you want.
Whether you are interested in becoming a professional musician, a community arts director, or a music therapist, our bachelor’s degree in music will give you the foundational training in music theory and performance you need for success.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s B.S. in Music Instrumental Degree? 
At Liberty, we are committed to providing the training you need to use your musical talents to the glory of God. Throughout our music instrumental bachelor’s program, you will learn from experienced musicians who have earned their degrees from distinguished music schools around the world and are dedicated to mentoring you as you develop your own musical style. When you choose our B.S. in Music Instrumental degree with us, you are enrolling in a program designed to help you reach your full potential as a musician who leads with excellence and integrity.
We are proud of the fact that our School of Music is among the top ten largest music schools in the nation. We are able to offer a variety of classes and performance opportunities from wind symphonies to jazz ensembles through our state-of-the-art classrooms, performances, and recording facilities designed to help you prepare for your career.
What Will You Learn in Our Music: Instrumental Bachelor’s Degree Program?
Throughout your pursuit of our bachelor’s degree in music instrumental, you will work with a distinguished musician from our faculty to increase your technical and performance skills, and to apply what you learn to various ensemble performances.
You will have the opportunity to learn a secondary instrument and highlight your accomplishments in a senior recital. As a Bachelor of Science degree, this program gives you approximately sixteen credit hours of electives, which you can use to take classes in fields like theatre, business, or music producing to enhance your résumé.
View the Degree Completion Plan for our Bachelor of Science in Music Instrumental, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 200 – Music, Art, Worship, and Culture
MUSC 310 – Principles of Arranging
MUSC 317 – Instrumental Conducting 
MUSC 360 – Commercial Improvisation Techniques
Highlights of Our B.S. in Music Instrumental Degree
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction. Our graduates have found careers playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, as Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our School of Music’s professional music publishing and recording company. This student-run label provides students, staff, and faculty with the opportunity to publish their work.
We are a designed “All-Steinway” school and are committed to providing our students with the best performance facilities possible.
Our wind symphony has performed at the CBDNA Southern Division Conference."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/music-vocal/","Train for Careers in the Music Industry with Our B.S. in Music Vocal Degree 
Nothing inspires the soul like music does. Our Bachelor of Science in Music Vocal degree provides the training and experience you need to further the eternal impact of your vocal performances and career goals. In our B.S. in Music Vocal program, you will work one on one with our respected faculty members to enhance your vocal performance skills – applying what you learn to your ensemble performances. Taught from a biblical worldview, our music bachelor’s degree program demonstrates the integration of worship and truth with all music genres, preparing you to lead as a Champion for Christ wherever God calls you to in the music industry.
Our bachelor’s degree in music with a vocal performance focus also offers the opportunity to take elective classes in fields related to your career goals, allowing you to explore the impact you can make through music in your community and beyond.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Music Vocal Degree? 
At Liberty, we are committed to providing you with the training you need to succeed in any career you choose in the music industry. As one of the top ten largest schools of music in the nation, we offer a variety of classes and performance opportunities from opera workshops to our Chamber Singers ensemble. Our classrooms, rehearsal and recording spaces, as well as our performance facilities, are equipped with state-of-the-art equipment, all of which you have access to use throughout your time studying with us. 
In our bachelor’s degree in music program, you will learn from distinguished musicians who have earned their degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the country and around the world. They will teach, mentor, and guide you as you complete your degree.
What Will You Learn in Our Music and Voice Bachelor’s Degree Program?
Throughout our bachelor’s degree in music, you will study harmonic theory, musicianship, and music technology. You will also have the opportunity to work one-on-one with an instructor throughout your program to increase your vocal technique and performance skills. We have many ensembles in our School of Music that provide the experience you need for future career pursuits.
With this degree, you have the opportunity to include 15-29 credit hours in an elective discipline, including instrumental or choral techniques, theatre, business, or commercial music courses. In addition to voice training, you can study an additional instrument so that you are prepared for a variety of teaching, performing, and conducting careers.
View our B.S. in Music Vocal Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 316 – Choral Conducting
MUSC 330 – Music Technology 1: Notation 
MUSC 408 – Vocal Pedagogy
Highlights of Our B.S. in Music Vocal Degree Program
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction, and our graduates have found careers as musicians playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, well-known Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Our LU Praise choir has performed for the President of the United States and as one of the three choirs chosen to represent the American Choral Directors Association in China.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our School of Music’s professional music publishing and recording company, and this student-run label provides students, staff, and faculty with the opportunity to publish their work.
Participate in one of our School of Music ensembles that draw on folk and bluegrass, a cappella, and Latino styles."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/music-in-world-cultures/","Develop a Global Approach to Music with a Bachelor’s Degree in Music in World Cultures
Do you want to pursue a career in the music industry? Are you passionate about connecting with people across cultural borders and impacting the world for Christ? If so, Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Music in World Cultures may be for you. This degree is designed to offer you maximum flexibility in your studies, so you can get the training you need to prepare for a variety of career paths.
Throughout our bachelor’s in music in world cultures, you’ll explore how important principles of ethnomusicology can be used to enrich worship training, mission work, and global scholarship in a Christian context. Our goal is to help foster your knowledge of other cultures and strengthen your commitment to the Christian life. Whether you want to work at home or abroad, our music in world cultures degree can equip you to reach the world with the Gospel through music ministry.
Understanding the relationship between culture and music is a vital part of working as a musician or worship facilitator — especially in a global context. At Liberty, you can learn how to help communities contextualize worship arts and apply ethnomusicology principles in various real-world contexts. By analyzing non-Western systems of music, you can gain the tools needed to better connect with people across cultural and geographic boundaries. Partner with us and prepare to impact the world as a Champion for Christ!
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Music in World Cultures?
At Liberty, your success is our success. Our world cultures music degree can help you become a more culturally enriched musician, equip you to serve in ministry, or prepare you to teach music in other countries.
Here are some of the benefits of earning your Bachelor of Science in Music in World Cultures at Liberty University:
Respected Credentials | Liberty is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). Additionally, our bachelor’s in music in world cultures is accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM). You can pursue your degree with confidence knowing that our program has met rigorous academic standards and accreditation requirements.
Valuable Mentorship | Our faculty have years of experience working in academia, the music industry, and intercultural contexts. With their guidance, you can hone your musical skills, develop a sound understanding of ethnomusicology, and pursue exciting careers around the world.
Flexibility | We’ve created our world cultures music program with your success in mind. This degree includes room for several elective courses, so you can customize your studies to match your unique interests and career goals.
Well-Rounded Education | Our mission is to Train Champions for Christ. To fulfill this mission, we seek to offer state-of-the-art facilities and practical music training taught from a biblical perspective. At Liberty, you won’t just get a degree — you’ll receive a quality education that can enhance your industry knowledge and prepare you to make a global impact for the kingdom of God.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Music in World Cultures?
Throughout this program, you will explore important topics in music, ministry, and global studies. Liberty provides a mix of classroom instruction and practical, hands-on training that can help strengthen your effectiveness in global career fields. Your major courses will cover subjects like harmonic practices and theory, Old and New Testament music and worship, and musicianship. You’ll also study the history of music and worship as well as congregational worship practices of the evangelical traditions.
Several of our courses are geared specifically toward the study of world music and culture. For example, you’ll learn about essential aspects of intercultural communication theory and methods for engaging with other cultures. Our program can also help you understand non-Western music theory, ethnic music cultures, and the relationship between culture and music. By exploring the cultural traditions, belief systems, and practices of various world cultures, you can become equipped to participate in global outreach, lead an effective music ministry, and impact the lives of people around the world.
Additionally, you’ll complete several applied music courses and participate in ensembles. The required internship provides an opportunity for you to put your skills to the test and gain marketable, on-the-job experience. All of our courses are taught from a biblical perspective, and our experienced faculty are committed to helping you enhance your musical skills.
Review the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
GLST 200 – Introduction to Global Studies
MUSC 202 – Old and New Testament Music and Worship
MUSC 313 – History of Music and Worship
MUSC 424 – Arts in Global Outreach
Highlights of Our World Cultures Music Program
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction. Our graduates have found careers as Christian singers and songwriters, as worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, as conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia, and as musicians playing for stars like Carrie Underwood.
Our LU Praise choir has produced a Dove Award-nominated album.
The Liberty University School of Music has strategic partnerships with leaders in the industry, such as Michael W. Smith. Each semester, the School of Music hosts industry professionals who share their expertise with current students and provide practical, hands-on experience for those pursuing their bachelor’s in music.
Participate in our School of Music ensembles, which range from folk and bluegrass to a cappella and Latino styles of music.
Our bachelor’s degree in music in world cultures is accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
This degree is an excellent stepping stone toward pursuing our residential MA in Worship Studies – Ethnomusicology or our online master’s in ethnomusicology program."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/music/bachelors/piano-performance/","Share Your Passion for Piano Performance with Our Bachelor’s Degree in Music 
You love playing the piano and want to share your passion for music as an accompanist, soloist, or maybe even as an instructor. By pursuing our bachelor’s degree in music with a specialization in piano performance you will further your piano skills by working one-on-one with our distinguished faculty members – who have performed in places like Carnegie Hall and around the world.
As one of the largest Christian universities in the nation, our mission is to help you reach your full potential as a pianist while preparing you to lead with excellence and integrity wherever God calls you to serve in the music industry.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Music – Piano Performance Degree? 
At Liberty, we are committed to providing you with the training you need to succeed in any career you choose in the music industry while using your talents to glorify God. This dedication is why our faculty members hold degrees from some of the most prestigious music schools in the nation and work to ensure you have the best learning environment possible.
As one of the top ten largest schools of music in the nation, we offer a variety of classes and performance opportunities ranging from wind symphonies to jazz ensembles. We also offer state-of-the-art rehearsal, recording, and performance facilities, so you can gain practical experience even before you graduate.
What Will You Learn in Our Piano Performance Bachelor’s Degree Program?
Throughout our B.M. in Piano Performance degree program, you will learn the basic components of music including harmonic and commercial theory, musicianship, and conducting. These courses will prepare you for the core piano courses in this degree. Our bachelor’s degree in piano performance will help you develop your accompaniment skills and gain experience by performing with our jazz and chamber music ensembles.
A great benefit of our piano performance degree is that you will work one-on-one with an experienced instructor to further your knowledge of piano as an instrument as you prepare for your senior recital. We are passionate about helping you become the best musician you can be, and our professors will mentor and coach you as you further your piano performance skills.
View our piano performance Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
MUSC 200 – Music, Art, Worship, and Culture
MUSC 304 – Keyboard Pedagogy 
MUSC 317 – Instrumental Conducting 
MUSC 391 – Keyboard Literature
Highlights of Our B.M. in Piano Performance Degree
We are dedicated to producing graduates of distinction, and our graduates have found careers playing for stars like Carrie Underwood, as Christian singers and songwriters, worship leaders at Harvest Bible Chapel, and conductors leading choir festivals throughout Southeast Asia.
Liberty Music Group (LMG) is our School of Music’s professional music publishing and recording company, and this student-run label provides students, staff, and faculty with the opportunity to publish their work.
We are a designated “All-Steinway” school and are committed to providing our students with the best performance facilities possible.
Participate in our School of Music ensembles that perform in styles ranging from folk and bluegrass to a cappella and Latino."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/","Serve Others Professionally by Joining Our School of Behavioral Sciences
Have you always had a desire to help others? This is a noble goal, but what type of profession allows you to serve others as your career? With our School of Behavioral Sciences, you’ll find out! We have degrees in psychology, social work, and more, all designed to give you the necessary tools and training to help others.
In our School of Behavioral Sciences, our Department of Psychology and Department of Social Work offer you undergraduate degrees that will make you career-ready and open the door to graduate school. By completing one of our programs, you can go on to become a psychologist, counselor, or caseworker. You can work with children, adolescents, the elderly, or special populations like refugees or sex trafficking victims.
So what are you waiting for? Our society is in desperate need of people who are trained and willing to spend their lives serving others. We want to equip you with the tools you need to help people professionally and effectively. Any program in our School of Behavioral Sciences is going to help you do just that.
Student Testimonials
CACREP Accreditation
Available School of Behavioral Sciences Degrees
Bachelor’s Degrees
Master’s Degrees
Doctoral Degrees
Why Choose Liberty’s School of Behavioral Sciences?
We’re excited you’re interested in joining the “helping profession” by pursuing one of our School of Behavioral Sciences degrees! Our program offers you many benefits from research projects, to internship opportunities, and learning from professionals in the field. You’re going to be well-equipped to pursue your career or apply to graduate school after completing one of our degrees.
In the School of Behavioral Sciences, we have 2 departments that offer undergraduate degrees. With our Department of Psychology, you can study counseling, criminal psychology, developmental psychology, sport psychology, and more. Additionally, you may choose our Department of Social Work, which offers our Bachelor of Science in Social Work. This program equips you to work in any social work-related field.
Check out more about our School of Behavioral Sciences departments below to see their benefits and find out what degree will fit your career goals.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Department of Psychology Benefits
Christ-centered courses that give you an edge in research and counseling techniques
Multiple areas of study to help you specialize in the career you want to pursue
Faculty-student mentoring in research projects with the potential of presentation publication of your research as an undergraduate student. Recently purchased operant boxes allow you to engage in animal research with faculty
Multiple psychology events and internship opportunities are available to give you real work and training experience
Academic trips available to Ecuador, New York, and Poland
Our psychology club — Club Psych — allows you to interact with professors and peers in the field
Available Programs
Psychology (B.S.) 
Child Life Specialist (B.S.)
Counseling (B.S.)
Criminal Psychology (B.S.)
Developmental Psychology (B.S.)
Industrial Organizational Psychology (B.S.)
Sport Psychology (B.S.)
Department of Social Work Benefits
Real-life experience available in shadowing, volunteer work, field trips, and internship opportunities
Internship opportunities available in the following locations abroad: Uganda, Australia, Philippines, Cambodia, Dominican Republic, Greece, and Spain
Practice classes give you the opportunity to work on the skills needed to succeed in social work with peers and professors in smaller classes
Eligibility to sit for licensure as a Bachelor of Social Work in over 30 states
Eligibility for Advanced Standing for Masters of Social Work, meaning you can complete your masters in one year instead of two
Available Programs
Social Work (B.S.)
Master of Social Work (M.S.W.)
Learn more about meeting requirements for licensure or certification in your state."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/","Impact the Lives of Others with a Bachelor’s Degree from Our School of Behavioral Sciences
You’re excited about making a difference in the lives of others, and we are too. With one of the bachelor’s degrees in our School of Behavioral Sciences, you’ll be able to turn your passion for helping others into an exciting and fulfilling career!
With multiple degrees and specializations to choose from within our School of Behavioral Sciences, you can choose between our human services or social work degrees—either of which are going to prepare you to start your career upon graduation. You can also choose from multiple psychology specializations aimed to help you get into a graduate school and become a professional counselor or psychologist. Whatever your career goals, we have a degree that will help you get there.
So what are you waiting for? The helping profession needs people like you who are not only willing to serve others but are excited about it! Let us help you make this dream into a reality by pursuing one of our behavioral sciences degrees.
Available Degree Programs
Social Work
Get a Bachelor of Science in Social Work (BSW) degree and be at the forefront of advocacy for justice, compassion, and care for people who are in need of social, mental, or spiritual help.
Psychology
Start exploring the inner workings of the mind and take the first step in becoming a psychologist or counselor with our Bachelor of Science in Psychology degree.
Check out our specializations below to really dive into your area of interest.
Specializations
Why Choose One of Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degrees in the School of Behavioral Sciences?
At Liberty, we strive to provide you with all that we have to offer—a challenging curriculum, professors who are professionals in their field, and opportunities for hands-on experience. Our bachelor’s degrees in the School of Behavioral Sciences are going to provide you will all of this and more.
One of our favorite assets is our professors. These men and women have real-life experience in their field, as well as degrees in human services, psychology, or social work. With their vast education and experience, they’re excited to pass their knowledge on to you as they teach, guide, and support you throughout your academic journey.
Another exciting aspect of our behavioral sciences degrees is all of the opportunity for experience. There are multiple psychology activities throughout each academic year where you can participate in seminars and hear from professionals. We have global academic trips and internships available to you. Plus, you can join Club Psych to be a part of a social group filled with like-minded peers and faculty.
School of Behavioral Sciences Bachelor’s Degree Information
Residential
120 total hours
Transfer in up to 75% of your total degree
View our course catalog
Admission Requirements for Undergraduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/psychology/child-life-specialist/","Help Children and Families Work Through Crises with a Child Life Specialist Degree
Are you passionate about working with children and helping families through traumatic life experiences? Maybe you’d like to pursue your child life specialist certification and complete a child life specialist college program that can help you provide child- and family-centered care to various populations. If this sounds like you, Liberty University’s BS in Psychology – Child Life Specialist degree is a great option!
Our psychology and child life specialist degree program can help provide the training you need to pursue God’s calling on your life. With our bachelor’s degree in psychology – child life specialist, you can learn how to support young patients and their families through times of crisis.
You are passionate about promoting the well-being of children and their families. Maybe you have personal experience with the hospitalization of a young loved one, close friend, your own child, or even yourself. You understand the fear and uncertainty that consumes loved ones during these traumatic times.
This degree program can help provide you with the knowledge and skills you need to work with families during these healthcare emergencies and other challenges. If you’re wondering how to become a child life specialist, Liberty’s BS in Psychology – Child Life Specialist degree is a great place to start!
Can I earn my child life specialist certification with this degree?
Our BS in Psychology — Child Life Specialist degree is designed to prepare you to sit for the national Certified Child Life Specialist (CCLS) examination.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Psychology Degree for Child Life Specialists?
Our desire is to equip you with the knowledge and experience you need to excel in your career field upon graduation. That’s why our child life specialist degree is designed to give you all the resources you need to successfully complete your degree and subsequently pursue your career as a child life specialist.
One of the most valuable resources available to you while you’re studying with us is our professors, who have experience working in counseling, psychology, and human services as well as master’s and doctoral degrees in related fields. They want to mentor you throughout your degree program and pass along the knowledge they’ve gained working in the field and in higher education.
Another valuable part of our child life specialist degree is the required internship. By completing an internship, you’ll receive real-life, hands-on experience in your field, so you can be career-ready upon graduation.
What Will You Learn as a Psychology and Child Life Specialist Major?
At Liberty, we aim to provide you with a psychology and child life degree that can help prepare you to pursue a graduate, psychology-related degree or start your career upon graduation. Our child life specialist degree provides foundational training in psychology-related subjects as well as more specialized knowledge that you will need to pursue a career as a specialist in child development.
Our foundational courses in psychology provide training in the following topics:
Abnormal psychology
Behavioral modification
Multicultural counseling and research issues
Psychological measurement
Psychology of personality
Social psychology
Additionally, the child life specialization focuses on courses related to childhood development and healthcare needs. These classes, along with your required internship, can help equip you with the training, skills, and abilities needed to succeed as a child life professional. The time to prepare for the future is now. Partner with us to begin a rewarding career in child psychology.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
PSYC 312 – Social Psychology
PSYC 341 – Psychology of Personality
PSYC 365 – Psychological Foundations of Learning
PSYC 420 – Psychology and Christianity
Highlights of Our Psychology – Child Life Specialist Degree
Completion of our child life specialist degree provides the knowledge and experience you need to sit for the national certification exam to become a Certified Child Life Specialist (CCLS).
Our Christ-centered courses can give you an edge in research and counseling techniques.
Receive faculty-student mentoring while conducting research projects with the potential for publication of your research as an undergraduate student.
Use our operant boxes to conduct animal research alongside faculty.
Multiple psychology events and internship opportunities are available to give you practical, hands-on training and experience.
Academic trips are available to Ecuador, New York, and Poland.
Our psychology club — Club Psych — provides a way for you to interact with professors and peers in the field."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/psychology/counseling/","Learn to Counsel Others with Our Bachelor’s Degree in Psychology: Counseling
Have you always loved listening to others, helping them handle situations, address problems in their lives, and make positive decisions? Then you may be interested in becoming a professional counselor! This career field is an exciting one for people like you who want to help others. Our Bachelor of Science in Psychology – Counseling will equip you with the tools and training you need to be successful.
You want to help people, listen to them, and guide them through their problems. We get it, and we want to equip you to start a career doing so. Our counseling degree is going to prepare you to apply to a professional counseling graduate program. You’ll be able to work as a counselor in churches, nonprofit organizations, group homes, treatment centers, schools, or you may even start your own practice.
So don’t wait any longer! People are in desperate need of professionals who are excited to support them through their life’s journey.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Psychology: Counseling Degree?
You need to be prepared and trained when you’re working in a field that has a direct impact on the lives of others. That’s why at Liberty we want you to have all the tools and resources you need for a successful college education, as it directly affects your future career.
One of the most valuable resources we offer to you as a student is our professors. These men and women are here to support and guide you both academically and spiritually. Plus, they are professionals in their field with psychology degrees and real-life counseling experience.
Another great resource to you is the opportunity for hands-on experience. Our counseling degree has a required internship, meaning you are guaranteed to get experience before graduating. Plus, you have the opportunity to attend psychology activities and network with peers and faculty by joining Club Psych.
What Will You Learn in Our Psychology: Counseling Degree?
We have carefully crafted the curriculum in this degree to ensure that you’ll have all the core courses and training needed to pursue a graduate program in professional counseling. If your goal is to move directly into the workforce after graduation, this degree can provide the credentials you need to become an asset to any organization or business in which you work.
Throughout this degree, you’re going to learn foundational knowledge in psychology, including social psychology, behavioral modification, personality, and multicultural counseling.
The specialization in counseling is going to give you additional insight into the following areas of study:
Counseling processes and techniques
Crisis intervention
Group dynamics
Marriage and family
Theories in counseling and psychotherapy
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
PSYC 312 – Social Psychology
PSYC 341 – Psychology of Personality
PSYC 365 – Psychological Foundations of Learning
PSYC 420 – Psychology and Christianity
Highlights of Our Psychology – Counseling Degree
Christ-centered courses that give you the cutting edge in research and counseling techniques
Multiple areas of study to help you specialize in the career you want to pursue
Faculty-student mentoring in research projects with the potential of presentation publication of your research as an undergraduate student
Multiple psychology events and internship opportunities are available to give you training experience
Academic trips available to Ecuador, New York, and Poland
Our psychology club—Club Psych—allows you to interact with professors and peers in the field"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/psychology/developmental-psychology/","Use Psychological Expertise to Help Children and Adolescents by Studying Developmental Psychology
Have you always been interested in working with children and young adults? Do you want to understand how the human mind develops to be able to make a positive change in the lives of others? At Liberty University, we understand that calling and want to help you make a positive impact. When you pursue our Bachelor of Science in Psychology: Developmental Psychology degree, you’ll receive all the foundational knowledge you need to pursue a career as a child psychologist.
You understand that young people are the future, and you want to prepare yourself to be a positive influence. What better way to do that than by helping struggling children and adolescents? A developmental psychology degree will prepare you to enter graduate school and become a professional counselor where you can then pursue careers in schools, treatment centers, churches, group homes, or even start your own private practice!
So what are you waiting for? This field needs caring, compassionate, and educated professionals who help children and their parents work through tough challenges. Pursuing our developmental psychology degree is the first step in getting you there.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Psychology: Developmental Psychology Degree?
Choosing a school and a degree is an exciting, yet challenging choice to make! At Liberty, we want to make that choice simple for you. That’s why we’ve developed a cutting-edge curriculum taught by highly skilled professors. Our favorite asset is our professors. These men and women have earned degrees in psychology, and have years of practical experience in counseling others. They desire to pour into your academic life while they teach, guide, mentor, and support you.
You may even be able to participate in a research project with some of our professors where there is the opportunity for getting published as an undergraduate student. With opportunities for hands-on experience in the form of a required internship, you can apply your skills in a wide variety of settings including churches, schools, nonprofit organizations, or treatment centers. You’ll be fully prepared for graduate school or your career upon graduation.
What Will You Learn in Our Psychology: Developmental Psychology Degree?
You need a degree that will prepare you for the next step in your life—whether that’s being career-ready or applying to graduate school. With our developmental psychology degree, we’ve ensured that our curriculum will provide the important training you need for that next step in your professional life.
In our developmental psychology degree, some of the courses you’ll take will cover topics like social psychology, personality, statistics, psychological foundations of learning, and physiological psychology.
In addition, our developmental psychology specialization includes courses covering these areas of study:
Gerontology
Psychology of adolescence
Psychology of adulthood
Psychology of childhood
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
PSYC 312 – Social Psychology
PSYC 341 – Psychology of Personality
PSYC 365 – Psychological Foundations of Learning
PSYC 420 – Psychology and Christianity
Highlights of Our Psychology: Developmental Psychology Degree
Christ-centered courses that give you the cutting edge in research and counseling techniques
Multiple areas of study to help you specialize in the career you want to pursue
Faculty-student mentoring in research projects with the potential of presentation publication of your research as an undergraduate student
Multiple psychology events and internship opportunities are available to give you real work and training experience
Academic trips available to Ecuador, New York, and Poland
Our psychology club—Club Psych—allows you to interact with professors and peers in the field"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/psychology/criminal-psychology/","Understand the Mind of a Criminal with a Bachelor’s Degree in Criminal Psychology
Have you always been interested in how the criminal mind works? Maybe crime TV has inspired you to bring about justice in the real world. A career as a criminologist could be your calling! With our Bachelor of Science in Psychology: Criminal Psychology degree, you’ll receive the tools you need to pursue a career in the field or apply to a graduate school. A career as a criminologist means that you’ll understand the intent and motives that led to a crime, as well as help bring justice to victims with your help in solving crimes. You could also work as a psychologist, detective, or police officer.
Make an impact on the world by bettering the criminal justice system, rehabilitating criminals, and bringing peace of mind to victims. This field needs people like you who are excited and passionate about what they do. Pursuing our criminal psychology degree will get you one step closer to making the impact you want to see.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Psychology: Criminal Psychology Degree?
At Liberty, we want you to have the best we can offer. You’re going to learn from experienced professionals and get the hands-on experience you need to excel in your field. One of the most important resources we have to offer is our professors. These men and women are excited to teach, mentor, guide, and support you throughout your academic journey with us. They are also highly trained professionals with degrees in psychology and years of experience in the field.
Another exciting benefit that awaits you in our criminal psychology degree is the experience. While you have the opportunity of participating in research projects, psychology activities, and Club Psych, the most exciting option for experience is your internship. You can intern with hospitals, schools, and police departments. We’ve even had students intern with the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security!
What Will You Learn in Our Psychology: Criminal Psychology Degree?
We want you to be fully equipped to enter the career of your choice or apply to graduate school upon graduation, and the courses and internship you’ll take part in will give you all the tools you need for success. As a criminologist, you’ll need a strong foundation in psychology. That’s why you’ll study topics like research, social psychology, behavioral modification, personality, multicultural counseling, and statistics in psychology.
Since you’re specializing in criminal psychology, you’ll take the following courses:
Criminology
Crisis Intervention
Introduction to Criminal Justice
Overview of Theory and Treatment of Substance Abuse
Psychology of Criminal Behavior
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
PSYC 312 – Social Psychology
PSYC 341 – Psychology of Personality
PSYC 365 – Psychological Foundations of Learning
PSYC 420 – Psychology and Christianity
Highlights of Our Psychology: Criminal Psychology Degree
Christ-centered courses that give you the cutting edge in research and counseling techniques
Multiple areas of study to help you specialize in the career you want to pursue
Faculty-student mentoring in research projects with the potential of presentation publication of your research as an undergraduate student
Multiple psychology events and internship opportunities are available to give you real work and training experience
Academic trips available to Ecuador, New York, and Poland
Our psychology club—Club Psych, which allows for interaction with professors and peers in the field"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/psychology/sport-psychology/","Improve the Minds of Athletes with a Degree in Sport Psychology
Have you always loved sports? Are you interested in working with athletes as your profession? Our Bachelor of Science in Psychology: Sport Psychology may be the degree for you! This program will help you motivate athletes who are struggling or desire to improve their performance.
We understand your love for sports. They bring people together to celebrate a common interest. Plus, they’re fun and exciting! But what would sports be without the athletes? As a sport psychologist, you can help athletes overcome struggles like anger, forgetting important plays, and freezing at crucial moments. You’ll also be able to improve their performance by working on mental exercises.
So don’t wait any longer! There are fans who are waiting for people like you to professionally work with the athletes they love. Our athletes spend so much time working on their bodies that it is important that someone focuses on their minds. Pursuing our sport psychology degree is going to get you one major step closer to providing this service to tomorrow’s athletes.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Psychology: Sport Psychology Degree?
You need a program that will set you apart from the competition and prepare you for your future. You may choose to immediately start your career upon graduation or apply to graduate school. Either way, we’ve got you covered with the resources and experience you’ll need to excel in your field.
One of our most valuable resources is our professors. These men and women are such an important asset to you as a student because they are highly skilled professionals in the field of sport psychology with years of experience and degrees in related fields. Plus, they are excited about the opportunity to mentor, guide, and support you throughout your academic journey here at Liberty.
Something else you’ll take part in is our required internship. This is your chance to get real-world experience before you graduate and make valuable connections along the way. You may choose to intern with a school, church, nonprofit, or private practice, or you might work under a coach to get experience working with athletes directly.
What Will You Learn in Our Sport Psychology Degree?
Our desire is to provide you with a degree that will prepare you for a future in your intended field. We want you to feel ready for your next step upon graduation—whether that be starting your career immediately or going on to graduate school. Your courses will provide you with the tools and knowledge to be successful regardless of which path you choose.
You’re going to need foundational knowledge in order to succeed as a sport psychologist. That’s why your coursework will include topics like social psychology, personality, multicultural counseling, statistics, physiological psychology, and psychological measurement.
Additionally, our sport psychology specialization will give you additional insight with training from the following courses:
Experimental Design in Research
Group Dynamics
Human Nutrition
Introduction to Sport Management
Sport and Exercise Psychology
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
PSYC 312 – Social Psychology
PSYC 341 – Psychology of Personality
PSYC 365 – Psychological Foundations of Learning
PSYC 420 – Psychology and Christianity
Highlights of Our Psychology: Sport Psychology Degree
Christ-centered courses that give you the cutting edge in research and counseling techniques
Multiple areas of study to help you specialize in the career you want to pursue
Faculty-student mentoring in research projects with the potential of presentation publication of your research as an undergraduate student
Multiple psychology events and internship opportunities are available to give you real work and training experience
Academic trips available to Ecuador, New York, and Poland
Our psychology club—Club Psych—allows you to interact with professors and peers in the field"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/engineering/bachelors/industrial-and-systems-engineering/","Learn to Increase Production Efficiency with an Industrial & Systems Engineering Degree 
Are you interested in engineering, but would like to focus more on the business or process side? Our Bachelor of Science in Industrial and Systems Engineering provides training in production design, plant layout, routing, and production mix. Throughout this degree, you will study some of the newest aspects of industrial engineering like examining human factors, production systems and engineering management, business analytics, and business intelligence.
Our data analysis courses focus on helping management connect the critical results of enterprise, such as revenue, low cost, and resource efficiency, to the controllable drivers of enterprise results. Enterprise, in this case, is a project that is difficult and typically takes effort, initiative, and resourcefulness. In this major, you will learn how to analyze data and explain the factors that go into the production of items and goods to your management team. You will also train on how to identify wastefulness in production systems and devise processes that are more efficient.
Our goal is to develop Christ-centered men and women with the values, knowledge, and skills essential to be a positive force in engineering-related industries. Our professors seek to know you individually and impart the knowledge and ability they possess to identify and solve engineering problems.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Industrial & Systems Engineering? 
Just as this degree will help you develop efficient systems and operations, our School of Engineering is dedicated to providing excellence in all areas of your education. As such, we have many opportunities for you to increase your skills and efficiency with hands-on educational opportunities.
Towards the end of this degree, you will have the chance to complete an internship, where you will work alongside seasoned professionals to make practical use of your skills and knowledge. With 49 companies, in nine states and four countries, you will have a great chance of finding an internship in an area related to your degree. The experience of active learning will give you a competitive edge in the job market upon graduation.
Apple Computer, Boeing, Georgia Pacific, NASA, Disney, the National Ground Intelligence Center for the U.S. Army, and Red Hat are just a few of the companies that have taken our students as interns. Your engineering skills may also be put to use supporting a mission. We have a number of organizations that have need of engineers for various projects. You will have the opportunity to serve God as well as receive valuable practical, problem-solving experience.
Accreditation provides value to your degree. Companies and organizations looking at your resume will know that your degree has met specific engineering industry standards. The Industrial and Systems Engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission(s) of ABET, https://www.abet.org, under the General Criteria and the Program Criteria for Industrial and Systems and Similarly Named Engineering Programs.*.
*ABET accredits postsecondary degree-granting programs housed within regionally accredited institutions. They accredit programs only, not degrees, departments, colleges, or institutions.
What Will You Learn in Our Industrial & Systems Engineering Bachelor’s Degree Program?
Private companies and military-related organizations all need to eliminate waste. As an industrial engineering student, you will learn the concepts of the time value of money, analysis of investments, and even how risk analysis is an asset to your future employer. Your instruction will include some of the fundamental principles of engineering and more specific classes related to electronics and data analysis.
Ergonomics is another factor in industrial design that relates to the proper design of machines and workspaces in an industrial setting to accommodate the human factor. In addition to these classes, you will learn how to set up and run simulations and how to interpret the data from such tests.
Download and review our Bachelor of Science in Industrial & Systems Engineering Degree Completion Plan.
Featured Courses
ENGI 220 – Engineering Economy
ENGI 450 – Human Factors & Ergonomics
ENGI 460 – Digital Simulation
ENGR 381 – Engineering Design Introduction
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s in Industrial & Systems Engineering Degree Program
The Industrial and Systems Engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission(s) of ABET, https://www.abet.org, under the General Criteria and the Program Criteria for Industrial and Systems and Similarly Named Engineering Programs.
Over the past 8 years, Liberty University students have passed the Fundamentals of Engineering (FE) exam at an average rate of 89%! In 2020, the national average across mechanical, electrical and computer, and industrial and systems engineering was under 75%.* With pass rates well above national averages, Liberty students are prepared to impact the world for Christ.
Many classes are associated with a lab. This gives you an opportunity for practical application and better assimilation of the lessons.
You will have access to the latest technology and a qualified faculty that seek to know you personally and to provide you with opportunities for education, research, and training in a Christ-centered environment.
You may have the opportunity to intern at a variety of fortune 500 companies and government agencies. This will not only offer you hands-on experience, but many internships are paid, allowing you to offset living costs.
Liberty University’s Center for Engineering Research & Education (CERE), located in nearby Bedford County, Virginia, promotes research and development of all forms of energy generation, storage, transmission, and through the Center for Advanced Engineering & Research, which is part of the CERE, engineering students at Liberty have the opportunity to observe and assist with research in the state-of-the-art facility.
*National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES), at FE Exam (viewed online May 11, 2021).
Read More
Liberty Center For Energy Research And Education (CERE)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/psychology/industrial-organizational-psychology/","Improve the Workplace with a Degree in Industrial Organizational Psychology
Have you always wanted to improve the lives of others? An exciting degree option for you may be our Bachelor of Science in Psychology: Industrial Organizational Psychology. A program like this will allow you to work with companies to improve the workplace and employee satisfaction. The field of industrial organizational psychology is a unique and exciting way to make a difference in the lives of others. You could go on to a career in human resources, or you could work as a consultant to companies.
Your purpose will be to understand the psychological undercurrents that are impacting morale, employee satisfaction and productivity, and management. So why wait any longer? Start working towards your career today. This industry needs people like you who are passionate about making a positive impact in the lives of others. We’re going to help you get there with our industrial organizational psychology degree.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Psychology: Industrial Organizational Psychology Degree?
At Liberty, we care about offering you the best. That’s why we have made sure your professors are professionals, your curriculum is challenging and enriching, and you’re getting the experience you need to be successful in your field. We are a teaching university. This means that the professors in the classroom teaching you every week care about your academic journey and will mentor, guide, and support you while you’re studying with us.
Plus, our professors have degrees and real-life experience in their field. You’re truly learning from the best! Another great opportunity in our industrial organizational psychology degree is the required internship. This will give you the experience you need to be successful in your career or in a graduate school program. You could intern with a school, church, company, or even in Washington D.C.
What Will You Learn in Our Psychology: Industrial Organizational Psychology Degree?
We want you to be well-prepared for the career or graduate school you choose after completing your degree with us. That’s why we’ve curated a curriculum that will provide all the foundational and specialized knowledge you need to succeed in your field. You need a strong base of knowledge in psychology to excel in the industrial organizational field. Some of the courses you’ll study include personality, research, behavioral modification, multicultural counseling, statistics, and psychological foundations of learning.
Additionally, your industrial organizational courses are going to prepare you for this special field. These courses include:
Consumer Psychology
Experimental Design in Research
Group Dynamics
Industrial and Organizational Psychology
Organizational Behavior and Management
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
PSYC 312 – Social Psychology
PSYC 341 – Psychology of Personality
PSYC 365 – Psychological Foundations of Learning
PSYC 420 – Psychology and Christianity
Highlights of Our Psychology: Industrial Organizational Psychology Degree
Christ-centered courses that give you the cutting edge in research and counseling techniques
Multiple areas of study to help you specialize in the career you want to pursue
Faculty-student mentoring in research projects with the potential of presentation publication of your research as an undergraduate student
Multiple psychology events and internship opportunities are available to give you real work and training experience
Academic trips available to Ecuador, New York, and Poland
Our psychology club—Club Psych—allows you to interact with professors and peers in the field"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/bachelors/biochemistry-and-molecular-biology/","Join the Scientific Community with a Degree in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Do you have a passion for science, learning more about the creation of the earth, the way our bodies are designed, and how the elements of the universe interact with one another? If you do, then our bachelor’s in biochemistry and molecular biology is the perfect degree to get you on track to enter the career field of your choice.
We understand that you’re excited about making an impact in the scientific community and using your passions and skills to help others. We want to help you hone your skills and give you the knowledge and training you need to excel in this challenging, but rewarding, field.
With our biochemistry and molecular biology degree, you’ll pursue a career or postgraduate work in the scientific field of your choice. Our graduates have opportunities in the fields of immunology, toxicology, pharmacology, neurochemistry, chemistry, and more!
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Degree?
At Liberty, we believe in providing you with the best education we can. With our biochemistry and molecular biology degree, you will be exposed to diverse and challenging coursework with hands-on training taught by our most experienced professors.
You’ll study many courses on chemistry and biology, as well as math, physics, and the history of life and creation of the world. This varying coursework allows you to go on to various careers or graduate school programs in the scientific field upon graduation.
Nearly every biology and chemistry course also has associated labs. This means you’re getting hands-on experience to supplement your in-class knowledge. Each course and lab is also taught by one of our top professors who has experience in their field as well as a related doctoral degree.
What Will You Learn in Our Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Degree?
The professors and staff within our Department of Biology and Chemistry want you to be well prepared to seek out the career or postgraduate work that you desire upon completing one of our degrees. Our biochemistry and molecular biology degree gives you both the coursework and laboratory experience to equip you for just that.
In our program, you’ll study physics, biochemistry, botany, genetics, cell biology, organic and physical chemistry, and more. These types of studies and labs provide the training you need to go into the career field of your choice or pursue postgraduate work within the medical field and scientific community.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
BCHM 451 – Biochemistry I
BIOL 455 – Molecular Techniques
CHEM 301 – Organic Chemistry I
Highlights of Our Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Degree
Labs are associated with nearly every course in the Department of Biology and Chemistry, giving you hands-on experience in your field before graduation.
Your courses and labs are taught by faculty with real-life experience and doctoral degrees.
Emphasis is placed on creationism, but evolution is also taught for a well-rounded perspective of the earth’s origins.
There are many opportunities to be involved in research projects with faculty as an undergraduate student."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/engineering/bachelors/mechanical-engineering/","Increase Production Efficiency with a Mechanical Engineering Degree
Do you find yourself taking things apart and putting them back together? Do you find it interesting how lasers work or how a fuel injector works? With a degree in mechanical engineering at Liberty University, you can explore how and why things work while learning how to create with care and excellence. Become a professional in your field and turn knowledge into wisdom as you apply the knowledge you learn in the classroom to cutting-edge projects.

Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Mechanical Engineering?
Our mechanical engineering bachelor’s degree seeks to help provide the industry-specific training you need to be successful in any career you choose. Our state-of-the-art facilities provide you with an opportunity to work with some of the latest tools and equipment available. Learn by studying in the classroom and then turn that knowledge into wisdom as you solidify the lessons imparted.
What Will You Learn in Our Mechanical Engineering Bachelor’s Degree Program?
Our faculty know that in order to Train Champions for Christ, there needs to be a precedent of excellence – a training ground that strives to help develop you in your God-given gifts and abilities. Liberty seeks to foster the professional and technical skills you need to be an asset in the field of mechanical engineering. Throughout this Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering degree, you’ll take engaging courses that cover topics like mechanical design, water flow, dynamic systems, heat transfer, statics, and thermodynamics.
As a mechanical engineer, you will be working with a number of different materials in the manufacturing process. We will teach you about the various properties, strengths and weaknesses, and even smart properties of these materials. One of the courses you take will teach you how to develop and program computer-controlled machines to carry out certain tasks. You will learn how to use sensors and motion transmission controllers to get machines to function the way you want.
Download and review our Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering Degree Completion Plan, and review our featured courses below for more information about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
ENGI 220 – Engineering Economy
ENGM 310 – Materials Engineering
ENGR 381 – Engineering Design Introduction
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s in Mechanical Engineering Degree Program
The Mechanical Engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission(s) of ABET, https://www.abet.org, under the General Criteria and the Program Criteria for Mechanical and Similarly Named Engineering Programs.
Over the past 8 years, Liberty University students have passed the Fundamentals of Engineering (FE) exam at an average rate of 89%! In 2020, the national average across mechanical, electrical and computer, and industrial and systems engineering was under 70%.* With pass rates well above national averages, Liberty students are prepared to impact the world for Christ.
Many classes are associated with a lab. This gives you an opportunity for practical application and better assimilation of the lessons."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/bachelors/biotechnology/","Use Biology to Make a Difference with Our Biotechnology Degree
Biotechnology is a diverse, exciting, and growing field. As a biotechnologist, you could be the next Marie Curie, developing your own theory or discovering chemical elements like she did! Maybe you’ll create a new vaccine, pesticide, or skin care regimen. Whatever your dreams and career goals are, we want to help you get there. Our Bachelor of Science in Biotechnology will give you the tools you need to be successful in this field.
With a degree in biotechnology, your career and educational possibilities are limitless. You may choose to start doing lab work upon graduation, or you could apply to medical school since this degree gives you all the prerequisites you’ll need. You may go on to become a physician, pharmacist, or psychiatrist.
So what are you waiting for? The field of biotechnology is growing, and it’s in desperate need of professionals like you — people who are excited about biology and making a difference in the world. Start our program and find your future.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Biotechnology Degree?
At Liberty, we want you to have all the knowledge, tools, experience, and resources you need to be successful in your field. Our program will prepare you for your career or give you the prerequisites you need to apply to a medical program of your choice.
So what resources do we have to offer you? One of the best things about our university is the professors. These men and women are highly trained professionals with years of experience and doctoral level degrees in the areas they teach. They are excited to pass on their knowledge to the next generation of physicians, pharmacists, and biotechnologists.
Another great aspect of our biotechnology degree is the training you’ll receive. Nearly all of our biology and chemistry courses have associated labs. This means you’re getting hands-on experience in your classes, which will be essential to your future in medical school or lab work.
What Will You Learn in Our Biotechnology Degree?
You need a degree that prepares you for your future career. We’ve packed our biotechnology degree with the courses and lab experience you need to pursue your career directly after graduation or attend the medical school of your choice.
Upon graduating with this degree, you’ll be well prepared for your future as a biotechnologist. Some of the coursework you’ll study includes physics, calculus, geometry, statistics, biochemistry, genetics, microbiology, cell biology, chemistry, and molecular techniques.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
BCHM 451 – Biochemistry I
BIOL 224 – General Biology I
BIOL 455 – Molecular Techniques
CHEM 321 – Analytical Chemistry
Highlights of Our Biotechnology Degree
Labs are associated with nearly every course in the Department of Biology and Chemistry, giving you hands-on experience in your field before graduation.
Your courses and labs are taught by faculty with real-life experience and doctoral degrees.
There is an emphasis placed on creationism, but evolution is also taught for a well-rounded perspective of the earth’s origins.
There are many opportunities to be involved in research projects with faculty as an undergraduate student.
Medical school acceptance rate is over 80% for the Department of Biology and Chemistry.
Our students’ average MCAT score is above the national average."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/degrees/masters/","Become an Expert in Your Field with a Residential Master’s Degree from Liberty University
Do you want to advance your career and become an expert in your industry? Liberty University’s residential master’s degrees can help. Our graduate programs can help provide the in-depth training you need to boost your résumé, increase your marketability, and stand out from the competition. As an accredited Christian university, we train students to lead with excellence and integrity in the professional world.
Maybe you want to become a professor, work in politics, or start a business. Or perhaps you are called to pastor a church, serve as a licensed counselor, or train athletes. Liberty’s residential graduate programs cover all of these fields and more! We offer a wide variety of on-campus degree options — so you can pick the program that best fits your unique goals and interests.
So don’t wait any longer! Apply today and join us as we strive to impact the world for Christ.
Available Residential Master’s Degree Programs by School
College of Arts and Sciences
Helms School of Government
John W. Rawlings School of Divinity
School of Behavioral Sciences
School of Business
School of Communication and the Arts
School of Engineering
School of Health Sciences
School of Music
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Complete a Residential Master’s Program at Liberty University?
When you pursue a master’s at Liberty University, you’ll receive a college experience unlike any other. We don’t just train industry experts — we equip leaders who want to make a difference in their workplace, their community, and the world. Check out what sets Liberty’s on-campus graduate school programs apart from other institutions:
Credibility | Liberty University’s degrees are regionally accredited through the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). Many of our individual schools have achieved additional accreditation, including our business, divinity, and counseling programs. For more information about Liberty’s accreditation, check out our complete accreditation list.
Experienced Faculty | Our professors have extensive experience in academia and real-world industries. Drawing on what they have learned in their own careers, they can offer valuable instruction and mentorship that can help increase your expertise. At Liberty, you won’t just gain textbook knowledge — you’ll study under professionals who are well-respected leaders in their fields.
Biblical Principles | To fulfill our mission of Training Champions for Christ, all of Liberty University’s programs are taught from a biblical perspective. You can become equipped to critically evaluate the various moral dilemmas and challenges you may encounter in your career. You’ll also learn how to integrate ethical standards with industry best practices, allowing you to stand out as a person of integrity in the workplace.
High-Quality Facilities | As a residential Liberty student, you can take advantage of numerous facilities on our beautiful campus in Lynchburg, Virginia. We offer a nationally ranked dining program, on-campus housing (for students under the age of 25), a commuter student lounge, and state-of-the-art fitness and recreation centers. We also have many spacious academic buildings and top-notch teaching and research labs.
Student Support | Our goal is to help you graduate career-ready. To do so, we offer services like writing coaching, a career center, peer mentorship, student counseling, and professional development events.
Flexibility | You can transfer in up to 50% of the credits needed to complete many of Liberty University’s graduate school programs. That way, you can finish your degree sooner while saving time and money!
Why Pursue a Master’s Degree?
There are many benefits to pursuing graduate studies at the master’s level. Earning a master’s degree may help you:
Pursue a career in a field that requires a graduate degree. Students who want to become licensed counselors, social workers, medical professionals, or postsecondary educators — among other careers — usually need to continue their schooling beyond the undergraduate level.
Boost your marketability. The job market has become increasingly competitive, and completing a master’s can help set you apart from candidates who only have a bachelor’s degree. It can also help you advance to managerial roles in your industry.
Earn a higher salary. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, professionals who hold a master’s degree earn almost 20% more per year than their counterparts who only have a bachelor’s.*
Take the next step toward pursuing a doctoral degree. Liberty offers a rigorous curriculum and practical training that can equip you to earn a PhD, DBA, EdD, or DPA, among other degrees.
Expand your professional network. Networking is an important aspect of career advancement. When you complete a graduate program at Liberty University, you can forge vital connections with industry professionals. 
Learn more about a subject you love. Maybe your goal with getting a master’s degree is less about your career, and more about getting to dive deeper into a subject you’re passionate about.
Receive specialized knowledge in your field. While bachelor’s degrees provide a broad base of knowledge in foundational skills, master’s programs offer more targeted training in a specific area — allowing you to hone your skills for the career you want.
Make a career change. A graduate degree can help equip you to start fresh and launch a new career, sometimes in an entirely different field than the one you’re currently in!
Develop skills that can improve your job performance. Maybe you want to become more effective at the job you’re currently in. If so, Liberty University’s grad school programs can help.
Learn about new technologies and practices in your field. In today’s world, every industry is constantly changing, adapting, and growing. Pursuing a master’s can help you get ahead of the curve and become more competitive in your career.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Unemployment rates and earnings by educational attainment (viewed online September 30, 2020). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
Frequently Asked Questions
Is a degree from Liberty University respected?
How much does it cost to get a residential master’s degree at Liberty University?
Does Liberty University require GRE scores?
Does Liberty University have dual master’s degrees?"
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/aeronautics/bachelors/","Pursue a Bachelor’s Degree in Aviation to Take Your Career off the Ground!
Are you looking for a college degree that will allow you to fly professionally, become a licensed aircraft mechanic, or develop as a leader in the field of aeronautics? Liberty University offers aviation bachelor’s degrees in three areas of study:
Flight Training
Aviation Administration
Maintenance Management
The aviation industry will be seeing extensive growth within the next 20 years. Pilots, mechanics, and industry leaders are highly sought after, with a worldwide need of over 637,000 new pilots and 648,000 new mechanics. Airline and military recruiters trust Liberty University aeronautics students, due to our strong Christian foundation and standard of academic excellence. Some of our students studying in the unmanned aerial system programs were hired before they even graduated! If you are looking for an exciting career in this growing industry, look no further. We have an aviation degree for you.
Available Degree Programs
Bachelor of Science in Aeronautics
Bachelor of Science in Aviation Administration
Bachelor of Science in Aviation Maintenance
Bachelor of Science in Aviation Technology – Flight and Maintenance
Bachelor of Science in Unmanned Aircraft Operations
Aviation Maintenance Technician Certificate
Medium Unmanned Aerial Systems Certificate
Credit for Life and Work Experience.
Another great plus at Liberty is the ability to take your experience and have it count towards class credits. You’ve worked hard and we offer numerous opportunities for you to gain credit hours for the experience or licenses you have.
Already Have Your Pilot’s or Mechanic’s License? (Aviation Experience Plus) 
Why Choose Liberty’s School of Aeronautics Bachelor’s Degrees?
Our School of Aeronautics uses state-of-the-art equipment and flight simulators to prepare our students for success in the ever-evolving aviation industry. Liberty is one of a few schools that offers unmanned aerial system (UAS) certification training with medium UAS, utilizing our partnership with Textron Systems and its Aerosonde aircraft.
Liberty University’s flight team captured the prestigious Loening Trophy for outstanding all-around collegiate aviation program in the United States in both 2017 and 2018. Additionally, our aviation programs have received the American Airlines Safety Award from 2016 to 2018.
As a student, you can get involved with our National Intercollegiate Flying Association (NIFA) Flight Team! Participate in competitions to earn trophies, bond with classmates, and further enrich your resume. We compete in the NIFA flight competition, the Women’s Air Race Classic and the National Aviation Maintenance Competition. Your success is our success, so allow us to equip you to achieve more with your bachelor’s degree!
School of Aeronautics Bachelor’s Degree Information
Residential degree
120-134 total credit hours depending on degree
Transfer in up to 75% of the degree
Check out our course catalog
Admission Requirements for Undergraduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/bachelors/biopsychology/","Understand the Human Mind with a Degree in Biopsychology
Are you interested in understanding the complexities of the mind? Maybe you’ve always been fascinated with how the human brain works. Our Bachelor of Science in Biopsychology may be the perfect degree option for you, as it combines training in biology, chemistry, and psychology. By pursuing this degree, you’ll get the foundation you need for a life in medicine, psychology, or a career that combines both disciplines.
You want to change the world. You want to make a difference, and you’re interested in doing that through the medical field. We understand that desire, which is why we designed our biopsychology degree to give you all the resources you need to either start your career upon graduation or go on to medical school.
Whether you’re interested in becoming a physician, neurosurgeon, psychologist, or psychiatrist, this degree is going to help you get there! So what are you waiting for? Start making positive changes in the world by being a compassionate professional in the medical field.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Biopsychology Degree?
At Liberty, we want to equip you with the tools you need to be successful in your career or graduate degree. Our biopsychology degree provides you with the knowledge, experience, and resources you need to meet your goals.
So what resources are available to you? One of our most valuable assets is our professors. These men and women are professionals in medicine and psychology and have earned their doctorates in a related field. They will pass on the knowledge they’ve gained from their education and years of experience while supporting, mentoring, and guiding you throughout your degree.
Another great resource available to you is the experience you’ll gain in labs. These lab classes provide hands-on training prior to graduation. Plus, you have psychology activities and internships that are available to you while studying with us.
What Will You Learn in Our Biopsychology Degree?
Our desire is to provide coursework that will prepare you for your future career and educational experiences. Whether you decide to start your career immediately after graduation or pursue graduate school, you will be equipped for success. 
Throughout this degree, you’ll study a wide variety of areas like:
Clinical human anatomy
Genetics
Neurobiology
Organic chemistry 
Physiological psychology
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
BIOL 224 – General Biology I
PSYC 380 – Physiological Psychology
Highlights of Our Biopsychology Degree
Labs are associated with nearly every course in the Department of Biology and Chemistry, giving you hands-on experience in your field before graduation.
Your courses and labs are taught by faculty with real-life experience and doctorate degrees.
There is an emphasis placed on creationism, but evolution is also taught for a well-rounded perspective of the earth’s origins.
There are many opportunities to be involved in research projects with faculty as an undergraduate student.
The medical school acceptance rate is over 80% for graduates of the Department of Biology and Chemistry.
Our students’ average MCAT score is above the national average."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/bachelors/biology/","Explore the Wonder of Creation with a Bachelor’s Degree in Biology
Do you love learning about living organisms and how they work? Are you fascinated with subjects like genetics, botany, and cell biology? Do you love exploring the complexity of God’s creation?
If you answered “yes” to any of these questions, then a career in biology may be right for you! Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in General Biology provides foundational training in many areas of biology. Our program can help you take the first step toward pursuing a career in veterinary medicine, environmental biology, laboratory work, or agricultural biology, among other fields.
Are you seeking a biology science degree that combines top-notch research with a Christian worldview? If so, Liberty has just what you need. Our goal is to help you become a Champion for Christ in your field. With guidance from our seasoned faculty, you can gain a deeper understanding of the world around you.
We’re excited to partner with you as you take this important step in your academic journey. Earn your degree today and embark on the exciting study of life!
Why pursue a degree in general biology?
Maybe you’re not yet sure which field of biology you want to work in. Or perhaps you’re looking to earn a more general bachelor’s degree before specializing at the master’s level. Either way, our general biology program can help you develop foundational knowledge in a variety of subjects.
Our biology bachelor’s program provides an in-depth yet broad introduction to many aspects of biology. Rather than focusing on a particular area of study, you will take courses in physics, genetics, cell biology, organic chemistry, and more!
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Biology Program?
At Liberty, we want to provide you with a college experience that helps nurture your spiritual, academic, and professional growth. Throughout this program, you can learn from industry experts while enjoying the spiritual and social aspects of our campus.
Here are some of the benefits of earning your general biology degree at Liberty University:
Experienced Faculty
Our professors have years of experience working in the scientific field, and many of them hold doctoral degrees. They are ready and eager to come alongside you as you pursue your degree. With their guidance, you can receive practical training in the classroom and laboratory.
You could even assist faculty members with their ongoing research projects, allowing you to receive real-world experience and valuable mentorship!
Biblical Training
Our faculty are also firmly rooted in the Christian faith. That’s what makes Liberty unique. In addition to teaching important scientific skills, we seek to train up leaders who approach science from a biblical perspective.
Top-Notch Facilities
Liberty has numerous teaching and research labs filled with state-of-the-art equipment, so you can gain experience operating the same tools used by industry professionals!
Some of the instruments you’ll get to use include a DNA sequencer, an ultrasound simulator, an atomic absorbance spectrometer, and a blood chemistry analyzer.
Hands-On Experience
We want to help make you a more marketable candidate for future jobs and graduate programs. That’s why we offer numerous opportunities for you to put your skills to the test in real-world settings. Almost all of our science courses have a required laboratory component, so you can complete hands-on experiments.
Additionally, you may want to participate in our exciting research projects. From algae and amphibians to conservation and DNA analysis, you can dive into the topics you’re most passionate about!
Opportunities to Connect
We want you to have a fulfilling social life while you’re here on campus. We offer weekly convocation services, campus church, and small groups meant to help foster your spiritual life. Liberty is also home to over 100 student-led clubs! You’ll have many opportunities to get plugged in, explore your interests, and connect with other students.
As a biology student, you may be interested in our Forensic Science Club or our Biology Club. Additionally, by joining our Scientific Research Society, you can hone your research skills and learn more about opportunities for internships or paid research positions.
Frequently Asked Questions
What master’s degree can I get with a bachelor’s in biology?
What jobs can I get with a bachelor’s in biology?
How much can I earn in a biology career?
What Will You Learn in Our General Biology Bachelor’s Degree?
In this program, you’ll take foundational courses in calculus, geometry, probability and statistics, and physics. These courses can help provide the base knowledge you need to succeed in a variety of STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) careers.
Your biology degree courses will focus heavily on the study of genetics, ecology, botany, cell biology, and organic chemistry. Diverse coursework like this can help you prepare for professional laboratory work or master’s-level programs.
You’ll also have the freedom to select various biology electives, so you can take classes that fit your career goals! By taking an origins course, you can evaluate the historical, philosophical, and scientific evidence for biblical creation. Our biology seminar can help you develop core research skills that are essential to a career in biology.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
BIOL 224 – General Biology I
Highlights of Our Bachelor of Science Degree in Biology
Most of our science courses have a required laboratory component, allowing you to gain hands-on experience in your field.
Our biology bachelor’s courses and labs are taught by faculty with years of experience in academia and the professional world.
This program places an emphasis on creationism, but you’ll also learn about evolution so you can develop a well-rounded approach to scientific concepts.
We offer undergraduate science students the chance to participate in exciting research projects."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/health-sciences/bachelors/biomedical-sciences/","Pursue a Career in the Medical Field with a Bachelor’s in Biomedical Sciences Degree
You love learning about the complexities of the human body. You dream of making scientific discoveries that change the world. You want to pursue a career in medicine and make a difference in the lives of others. 
If that sounds like you, Liberty’s B.S. in Biomedical Sciences can help make your dreams a reality! This program will equip you to apply to medical school. By earning our pre-med degree, you can take the first step toward becoming a physician, pharmacist, dentist, or physician assistant, among other exciting careers in the medical field.
Do you want to help meet the growing need for competent and compassionate health professionals? If so, Liberty’s biomedical sciences bachelor’s degree has just what you need. Whether you’re looking to launch a new career or enter the job market for the first time, we can help you lead with excellence in the medical industry.
“Biomedical Sciences” Definition:
A field that combines the areas of biology and medicine, with the goal of developing technologies and interventions for use in the healthcare industry.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Biomedical Degree Program?
At Liberty, you’ll have the opportunity to participate in exciting research projects. From algae and amphibians to DNA analysis and pathophysiology, you can dive into the subjects that you’re most passionate about! Additionally, you can forge valuable connections with other students and faculty, while gaining marketable experience that will help boost your résumé.
Liberty has numerous research labs filled with state-of-the-art equipment. From DNA sequencers to ultrasound simulators, you’ll get to operate the same scientific tools used by industry professionals! Our pre-med curriculum is based on cutting-edge research, so you can stay ahead of the curve and become a leader in your field.
We also offer shadowing and internship opportunities with local doctors, as well as Christian service opportunities in medicine. That way, you can receive practical training while using your skills to serve other people — even before you graduate! Upon graduation, you’ll be ready to take the Medical College Assessment Test (MCAT) and apply to top-notch medical programs.
Expand your professional network and social circle by joining one of our student organizations! Hone your academic research skills with the Scientific Research Society, or learn more about the medical field through our Pre-Medical Honor Society. We also offer student-led clubs for biology and pre-med students. At Liberty, you’ll have many opportunities to connect with your peers while boosting your academic record.
Frequently Asked Questions
What does “biomedical sciences” mean?
What does “pre-med” mean?
What can you do with a biomedical sciences degree?
How long is the pre-med program?
Can you get into medical school with a bachelor’s degree in biomedical sciences?
What Will You Learn in Our Biomedical Courses?
In Liberty University’s pre-med program, you’ll take foundational courses in biochemistry, biology, genetics, statistics, and human anatomy. By understanding how biology and medicine intertwine, you’ll be equipped to make important discoveries in the medical field. You can also gain the knowledge needed to prepare for medical school and other graduate programs.
Other topics of study include organic chemistry, physics, cell biology, and the history of life. Throughout all of your pre-med courses, you will explore science from a creationist perspective. You’ll also learn about evolution so that you can develop a well-rounded approach to scientific concepts.
Almost all of our science courses have a required laboratory component. That way, you can gain hands-on experience and apply what you’ve learned to real-world scenarios. Within the biology seminar, you’ll have the opportunity to develop research skills that are essential to a career in biomedicine.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
BCHM 450 – Medical Biochemistry
BIOL 313 – Clinical Human Anatomy
Global Studies
By earning our B.S. in Biomedical Sciences – Global Studies degree, you’ll be equipped to use your medical expertise to serve those overseas.
View the Degree Completion Plan.
Potential Careers
Disaster relief support technician
Epidemiologist
Field consultant
Global health educator
Global health program manager
Health policy analyst
Health scientist
Medical officer
Please note: Many career opportunities in this field will require additional education beyond a bachelor’s degree."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/business/bachelors/","Jumpstart Your Career with a Bachelor’s Degree in Business!
If learning more about the world of business interests you, but you can’t decide what specific field to focus on, let us help! At Liberty, our School of Business offers over 25 specializations designed to prepare you for a variety of career fields, so we are confident you will find a bachelor’s degree that best fits your unique goals.
Our core business curriculum will introduce you to the major areas of business, such as human resources and marketing. For students in the coaching and sport management tracks, your classes will examine leadership and communication principles vital to a career in the sports industry. When you begin your degree, you will complete foundational courses that incorporate all of these aspects of business, helping you gain a better understanding of which career track is best for you!
We have designed our business school to incorporate hands-on learning, giving students the most opportunities possible to learn real-world skills. Join your classmates in our Center for Entrepreneurship, or get familiar with our simulated stock trading room and information technology labs.
We are dedicated to providing the tools you need to make a difference. Our goal has always been to Train Champions for Christ, and our School of Business takes that seriously. From training in ethical hacking to honorable leadership, your courses will prepare you to lead in today’s business and sports industries with excellence and integrity.
Read More
Available Degree Programs
Bachelor of Science in Accounting
Bachelor of Science in Business Administration and Data Analysis 
Bachelor of Science in Coaching
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science
Bachelor of Science in Healthcare Informatics
Bachelor of Science in Hospitality Management
Bachelor of Science in Information Systems
Bachelor of Science in Information Technology
Bachelor of Science in Sport Management
Why Choose a Bachelor’s Degree from Liberty’s School of Business?
At Liberty, you will be surrounded by like-minded students who are passionate about getting the most out of their business degree. Our professors are dedicated to mentoring, advising, and supporting you throughout your bachelor’s program. In fact, the number one reason students say they are successful is due to the individual care our professors provide. And as one of the largest Christian universities in the nation, Liberty offers a unique atmosphere where you will be welcomed, encouraged, and prayed for by both professors and fellow students. 
As you pursue your degree, you will gain hands-on experience by using the resources in our School of Business building! You will have the opportunity to study in operational information technology labs and network and data centers. Additionally, try your hand at trading stocks in our simulated stock trading room, or visit the 2,000-square-foot Center for Entrepreneurship.
You also have the opportunity to get involved with our student organizations and honor societies. From our Accounting Society to our Technology & Engineering Club, joining an extra-curricular group will help you gain invaluable insight from peers and professionals alike. Some of the other opportunities you will find in our School of Business include:
Over 25 areas of study
3+1 accelerated business degrees (you can earn your bachelor’s and master’s degree in just 4 years)
Center for Entrepreneurship
Center for Cyber Excellence
Center for Financial Literacy
Business internships
As you pursue your degree, you will gain hands-on experience by using the resources in our School of Business building! You will have the opportunity to study in operational information technology labs and network and data centers. Additionally, try your hand at trading stocks in our simulated stock trading room, or in the 2,000-square-foot Entrepreneurship Center for Innovation.
You also have the opportunity to get involved with our student organizations and honor societies. From our Accounting Society to our Technology & Engineering Club, you will gain invaluable insight from peers and professionals alike! Some of the other opportunities you will find in our School of Business include:
Over 25 areas of study.
3+1 accelerated business degrees, so you can walk away with your bachelor’s and master’s degree in just 4 years!
Center for Entrepreneurship
Center for Cyber Security
Business internships
School of Business Bachelor’s Degree Program Information
Residential
Total Credit Hours: 120-129
Transfer in up to 75% of your total degree
Review our course catalog
Admission Requirements for Undergraduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/","Learn to Uphold the Law with Integrity and Excellence in Our Bachelor of Science in Criminal Justice Degree Program
You have a desire to protect your community, and our Bachelor of Science in Criminal Justice degree can help prepare you with the knowledge and practical experience you need to succeed in your law enforcement career. Throughout our criminal justice bachelor’s degree program, you will learn from experienced law enforcement officers who are passionate about teaching you the skills you need to serve your community with integrity and excellence. 
Our BS in Criminal Justice program provides you with opportunities to apply what you have learned through realistic simulations, internships with leading police departments, and special programs like Justice Project DNA testing. Partner with us and prepare for a career in criminal justice.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Criminal Justice?
Our criminal justice program is designed to prepare skilled professionals who are prepared to protect and serve in dynamic situations. Our professors have years of experience in law enforcement agencies and understand the nuances of criminological theory. With extensive experience in criminal justice and related fields, your professors are not only experts but ready to partner with you and see you succeed.
At Liberty, our mission is to Train Champions for Christ. Our courses are taught from a biblical worldview and our professors are dedicated to fostering critical thinking skills and new methods to help you turn your knowledge into wisdom. At Liberty, you can develop as a leader so you are better prepared to impact your community."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/communication-and-the-arts/bachelors/cinematic-arts/","Create, Direct, and Produce with a Degree in Film Production and Content Development from Liberty University
Do you have career aspirations of becoming a producer, director, or cinematographer? Partner your passion for film or television with our experienced faculty, Christian ethics, and cutting-edge facilities. We can help equip you with the skills you’ll need to make an impact in today’s film and television industry with your Bachelor of Science in Film Production and Content Development.
You deserve to study at a university that breaks the traditional mold for film and television education. We’ve created our film school around hands-on experience taught by skilled professionals who have worked in the industry for decades. Create film projects with your professors and peers alike in an environment that lets you apply your collegiate knowledge instantly.
Join us as we train the next generation of storytellers passionate about using cinematic storytelling to share life-changing messages with the world today. There’s a place for you here at Liberty!
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Film Production and Content Development?
The film and television industry is extremely competitive, but don’t be discouraged! Get a leg up on the competition with a bachelor’s degree from our reputable, nonprofit, Christian university. With our industry connections, experiential learning style, and an array of state-of-the-art equipment, you can make a name for yourself in the world of film and television production.
Build Your Professional Portfolio
Our cinematic arts program allows you to work under industry professionals and create a strong network with peers and professors alike. You’ll also walk away with a short film you wrote and directed, a polished feature-length screenplay, a business plan for the screenplay, certifications (Avid, Adobe, and DaVinci), and a demo reel of all your work created during your time at Liberty.
Develop Your Skills Using State-of-the-Art Equipment
We’ll help you build your portfolio using state-of-the-art, theatrical-grade equipment and facilities that include:
RED Helium, RED Epic Dragon, and RED Prime Lenses
Mixing and 4K coloring edit suites
Audio-Technical Microphones and DeSisti Lights
Two large editing labs and a THX-certified 7.1 dubbing stage
ADR booths and classrooms equipped with 7.1 surround
To see a full list of available equipment, check out our Zaki Gordon Cinematic Arts Center
What Will You Learn in Our B.S. in Film Production and Content Development?
Our bachelor’s in film production and content development degree provides training in film industry standards through hands-on experience with industry-standard equipment, world-class facilities, and professors who are experts in the field.
Through the program, you will develop your knowledge and practice in:
Branding and entrepreneurship
Cinematography, sound design, directing, and editing
Legal practices in cinema
Marketing and persuasion tactics
Narrative and documentary styles
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
CINE 201 – Introduction to Screenwriting
CINE 302 – Story Analysis
CINE 303 – Producing and Directing
CINE 402 – Feature Production
Highlights of Our Film Production and Content Development Degree
Here are some of the benefits of pursuing Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Film Production and Content Development degree:
You will participate in a large-format production with working professionals. Some of our productions have earned awards, and our program is the first, at any university, to produce a student-driven movie with a national theatrical release.
You will study all aspects and positions of filmmaking, including legal and business affairs. Well-rounded training will ensure an attractive resume and opportunities for career success.
Each student from our B.S. in Film Production and Content Development program graduates with their own film created in a theatrical 4K workflow using RED Weapon cameras and an up to 5.1 surround sound mix.
Additionally, you can pursue certification in Avid, Adobe, and DaVinci products.
Liberty’s film production graduates have worked on blockbuster movies like Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle, Black Panther, and Avengers: Infinity War. Graduates have also used their skills in other job sectors such as education and government, and some have started their own businesses!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/yearbook/online-option/","Online Option
Check out the complimentary online version
The Selah Yearbook is available in a free online format so anyone can have access to this treasured keepsake. Take a look back at the university in 1988 when your parents were here or your senior year. All of the content found in the printed yearbook is included in the online version.
Online yearbook
*Note due to the size of Liberty’s student body, we are not able to include the name/photo of each student."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/education/bachelors/","From Teaching Licensure in Elementary and Middle Education to Special Education, We Have a Program to Help You Succeed!
Prepare for an exciting career in elementary and middle school teaching! These are achievable career tracks with Liberty’s School of Education bachelor’s degrees.
If you are looking to become a licensed teacher, running your own classroom, or working in education administration, we have great degree options for you! We offer licensure from pre-K-6, middle grade, and special education. In the middle education program, you will be trained in the specialization of your choice! You can focus on English or social sciences.
Available Degrees and Certificates
Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) Degrees
Undergraduate Certificates
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Learn more about meeting requirements for licensure or certification in your state.
Why Choose Liberty’s Education Bachelor’s Degrees?
Pursuing a bachelor’s degree takes time and money, two resources that should be spent wisely. If you are looking to become a licensed teacher or education professional, our programs will give you a great return on both. Invest in your future with Liberty.
What Liberty’s School of Education bachelor’s degrees can offer you:
All of our School of Education initial and advanced licensure programs are accredited by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). Our programs are also approved by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE) and accredited by the Association of Christian Schools International (ACSI).
Pursuing our Bachelor of Education licensure-tracks may make you eligible for the Federal TEACH Grant.
We have an Educational Technology Lab, which provides students with resources, software, and equipment, such as laptops, Apple TVs, digital cameras, and USB microphones.
We have various student organizations, including our award-winning Kappa Delta Pi chapter and our Urban Education Club.
School of Education Bachelor’s Degree Information
Residential
120-136 total credit hours
Transfer in up to 75% of your total degree
Review our course catalog
Admission Requirements for Undergraduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received."
"https://www.liberty.edu/yearbook/print-option/","Print Option
Relive Your Memories
Order Your Selah Yearbook
The Selah Yearbook is available in a print format for $35. The 2020-21 yearbook is in production and will be completed spring of 2022. Orders will be shipped out immediately following completion. If you are ordering a 2018 or earlier yearbook, please allow six weeks for order fulfillment.
Order your copy
What’s included in the print version?
On-campus events
Student profiles
Liberty in the news
Construction updates
Student quotes
Team and club photos
Current graduates’ names (residential and online undergrad and post-undergrad)
And more!
Don’t see the book you’re looking for?
Check out our past editions page for information on ordering these books.
*Note that due to the size of Liberty’s student body, we are not able to include the name/photo of each student."
"https://www.liberty.edu/residential/engineering/bachelors/","Design and Build to Benefit People with a Bachelor’s Degree from Our School of Engineering
You want to design and build. You have visions and ideas in your head that you would like to see become a reality. We are committed to helping you enter a fulfilling career that will be both lucrative and rewarding. You can see your ideas take shape with a bachelor’s degree in engineering. Liberty University’s School of Engineering will help you see your dreams realized.
Our School of Engineering has the latest technology available for you to use, as well as modern facilities to design, build, and test the products you develop. In addition to the foundational principles of engineering, you will learn the skills needed to research and manage a product from start to finish. Our qualified faculty will provide you with the guidance and mentorship you need in your education, research, and ultimately in your professional career.
Personal interaction with your professors and a Christian campus environment will help you excel in your studies and lay the foundation for a lifetime of service. Our engineering bachelor degree programs will enable you to research and apply your new skills to the development of new technology.
Award-Winning Campus
At Liberty, you’ll find an affordable, high-quality education that equips students like you for the real world. Our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s Top 5 college campuses in America. Earning your degree from a nonprofit university with state-of-the-art resources like ours can help set you apart from your peers.
Available Degree Programs
Civil Engineering
Computer Engineering
Electrical Engineering
Industrial and Systems Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Why Choose One of Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degrees in the School of Engineering?
At Liberty University, our qualified faculty will assist you in getting the practical experience you need in the field of engineering. There are many opportunities for you to get that by lending your engineering training and skills to assist with local needs identified by Liberty.
Our students have had internships in 49 companies across nine states and four countries. Companies like Disney, Apple, Babcock & Wilcox, NASA, Volvo, and Lockheed Martin have offered internship opportunities to our students. Participating in an internship is a great chance to demonstrate your mastery of the information you have learned throughout your degree as well as expand your skill set with first-hand technical experience and problem-solving.
Admission Requirements for Undergraduate Degrees
Every application is reviewed by the admission committee on a case-by-case basis, meaning there are no set minimums for acceptance. However, all applicants must submit the following documents* for admission:
Admission application
Official high school transcripts
Official college transcripts (if applicable)
Results from the CLT, SAT, or ACT are not required for admission, but may be used in consideration for merit-based aid.
Admission essay
*Note that additional documentation may be requested by the admission committee after your application has been received.
Read More
School of Engineering Bachelor’s Degree Information
Residential 
133-136 total credit hours
Transfer in up to 75% of the degree total
View our bachelor’s degree course catalog"
"https://www.liberty.edu/yearbook/past-editions/","Liberty Online
Residential"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/digital-media-journalism/","Digital Media and Journalism
Study Digital Media & Journalism at a Christian University 
Make Your Mark in the Media Industry
Get the skills you need to tell today’s stories to digital audiences through the Department of Digital Media & Journalism at Liberty University.
Whether you are on-camera, at the news desk, in the studio, or at the writer’s table, you will be equipped with the ability and knowledge needed to craft quality media pieces. And you can get a portfolio that showcases these strengths to future employers.
You can also make an impact in today’s television, journalism, and radio industries as a student, through our many award-winning campus media opportunities.
A Christian Digital Media & Journalism Experience
Learn from faculty members who embrace their Christian faith and are experienced professionals specializing in many areas such as media production, broadcast journalism, videography, sound design, audio engineering, and newspaper reporting. Our digital media & journalism programs teach students how they can use media to impact the culture for Christ.
Ready for an Exciting Career in Digital Media & Journalism?
Other Academic Programs and Facilities in Digital Media and Journalism
Digital Media & Journalism Minors
Enhance any degree and boost your career with a minor in Digital Media & Journalism. Choose from our many options in audio, video, and digital journalism.
Digital Media Lab
As a student enrolled in a qualified Digital Media or Journalism course, you will have access to top-level video, audio, lighting, and grip equipment to complete class projects.
Gain Digital Media Experience Right Here On Campus 

Internships
Get the experience you need with professionals who may be able to help you land a job in your area of interest. Fine-tune your skill sets in this exciting form of career training.

90.9 The Light
Gain exposure to every aspect of radio station work. Build your resume as you train in our new studio with state-of-the-art audio equipment and software.

Liberty Champion
Write and produce content for the Liberty Champion, one of the largest weekly community newspapers in Central Virginia.
Grow as a Rising Professional with Our State-Of-The-Art Facilities
Housing more than a million dollars worth of equipment, the Digital Media Broadcast Studios, Student Media Lab, and 90.9 The Light Radio Station are crucial catalysts for hands-on learning in the Digital Media & Journalism department. The Digital Media Broadcast Studios serve as dynamic spaces where students can be fully immersed in the broadcast experience. The Student Media Lab gives you access to industry-standard cameras, audio equipment, lighting gear, and other support equipment – all available for check-out. And 90.9 The Light’s state-of-the-art radio facility gives students the ability to train for live broadcasting or behind-the-scenes station work.
Facilities and equipment include:

Student Media Lab

90.9 The Light Radio Station

Broadcast Studio

Student Media Lab

Student Media Lab

90.9 The Light Radio Station

Broadcast Studio

Student Media Lab
Instagram Feed"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/digital-media-journalism/digital-media-lab/","Fiilex X316 Kit
Fiilex X316 combines 1 Matrix power panel LED and 2 P360 Pro Plus LEDs into one portable lighting kit. This kit includes: 1 softbox for the Matrix and for the P360: 2 frost covers, 2 barn doors, 2 light stands. C-stands can be rented upon request. *Available for reservation to any 300-400 level DIGI classes*
Special Features:
3000-5600K Color Temperature
Lightweight
0-100% dimming
Fiilex K301PP Kit
The Fiilex K301PP is a 3 light LED interview travel kit. This kit includes: 3 P360 Pro Plus LED lights, 3 barndoors, 3 AC/DC Adapters, and 3 light stands. *Available for reservation to any level Journalism or DIGI classes*
Special Features:
65 degree beam spread
2800-5600K Color Temperature
Smooth and sharp dimming modes
IKAN Canvas Bi-Color Bendable 3-Point kit
IKAN IB508-V2 gives small studio or location videographers and photographers all the features required for professional performance. This kit includes: 3 IB508-v2s, diffusion filter, 6.25′ light stand, and a stand mount. *Available for reservation to any 300-400 level DIGI classes*
Special Features:
3200-5600K Color Temperature
Energy efficient and lightweight
AC/NP-F
IKAN IB508-V2 Bi-Color Panel LED Studio Lighting Kit
IKAN IB508-V2 gives small studio or location videographers and photographers all the features required for professional performance. This kit includes: 3 IB508-v2s, diffusion filter, 6.25′ light stand, and a stand mount. *Available for reservation to any 300-400 level DIGI classes*
Special Features:
3200-5600K Color Temperature
Energy efficient and lightweight
AC/NP-F
Lighting Support
Backdrops
C-stands
Diffusion
Gels
Lume Cube Shoe Mount Adapter
Reflectors"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/digital-media-journalism/bachelors/","Contact
(434) 582-2111
(434) 582-7836 (fax)
DMAJ@liberty.edu
Chair & Faculty Offices
Green Hall 1370A
Connect with Digital Media & Journalism"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/digital-media-journalism/minors/","Contact
(434) 582-2111
(434) 582-7836 (fax)
DMAJ@liberty.edu
Chair & Faculty Offices
Green Hall 1370A
Connect with Digital Media & Journalism"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/digital-media-journalism/student-advising/","Student Advising
All Students: Please review the Course Crosswalk prior to registration. Some courses may not be offered during your preferred semester, may have new course numbers, or may no longer be offered at all. Please see your advisor for details: DMAJ Major Crosswalk 2021
Freshmen/Sophomores: find your professional advisor in CASAS.
Juniors/Seniors: Do you have questions about your classes, career field, or future? Select your advisor from the list below and send an email to set up an appointment.
Advisors
Faculty Advisors advise students based on the first letter of the last name. Please refer to parentheses next to the professor’s name to locate your advisor.
Digital Media and Journalism (B.S.)
(Church Media Production/Internships) Toni Perry
tperry28@liberty.edu
(434) 592-4116
Green Hall, Room 1370W
(Journalism A-I) Dr. Bruce Kirk
bmkirk@liberty.edu
(434) 582-7220
Green Hall, Room 1370F
(Journalism J-Q) Amy Bonebright
bonebright@liberty.edu
(434) 592-4675
Green Hall, Room 1370X
(Journalism R-Z) Dr. Donald H. Alban Jr. 
dhalban@liberty.edu
(434) 582-2505
Green Hall, Room 1370P
If you still have questions after meeting with your academic advisor, feel free to contact the Department Chair:
John C. Rost, MFA
jcrost@liberty.edu
(434) 592-6905
Green Hall, Room 1370B"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/digital-media-journalism/internships/","Internships
Finding an Internship: Digital Media & Journalism
Strategic & Personal Communication Internships
Every Digital Media & Journalism student must complete a school-approved internship for at least 3 credit hours to graduate. This is a great way to meet prospective employers and get your name out there. So, start networking now no matter where you are in your educational journey. This means talking to your classmates, friends, professors, etc. The people you see every day can help you a lot. Career Services also has a website called Handshake that can help you find internships with companies that are looking for someone like you.
DMCA 499 Course Eligibility
To be eligible for an internship for credit, you must have:
Junior or senior status
2.0 GPA or higher
Declared a major within the Digital Media & Journalism department
Completed 24 hours within your major (not including COMS 101 or SCOM 110)
Completion of the DMCA 499 Internship Workshop before interning (see below for the current schedule)
No more than one outstanding BWVW/CSER requirement (Residential students only)
Note: Internship opportunities must be approved through an online application process through the School of Communication & the Arts Handshake portal (see below).
Prerequisite Internship Workshop – Two options
1. Virtual Internship Workshop:
We are offering the all-new Virtual DMCA 499 Internship Workshop online! We encourage all Residential and Liberty Online students to take advantage of this on-demand option, allowing SCA majors to complete the workshop requirement at any time before applying for the DMCA 499 Internship class. We will still offer in-person workshops for those who want them during the Fall and Spring semesters.
Juniors and Seniors intending to complete an internship for credit must attend a workshop at least once before applying for the DMCA 499 course. Students only need to complete one (1) workshop online or in person.
The virtual workshop will take about an hour. The virtual workshop includes a quiz that must be passed with a 90% or better.
Click the button below to take the virtual workshop now. Be sure to log in using your Liberty credentials to make sure your quiz is registered:
Virtual DMCA 499 Internship Workshop 
2. Live Workshops (attend one):
Monday, September 4th, 10:30 AM – 11:45 AM ET, Green Hall 1870 A/B: Pre-Register HERE: LIVE DMCA 499 Internship Workshop – A
Monday, September 18th, 10:30 AM – 11:45 AM ET, Green Hall 1870 A/B: Pre-Register HERE: LIVE DMCA 499 Internship Workshop – B
Monday, October 2nd, 10:30 AM – 11:45 AM ET, Green Hall 1870 A/B: Pre-Register HERE: LIVE DMCA 499 Internship Workshop – C
Application Packet: 
You will need the following documents as you complete the Internship Workshop and prepare to apply for the DMCA 499 course on Handshake. The packet includes the following documents:
USIA SSA DRAFT: Use this draft form to gather all the information you will use to complete the Handshake application.
How To Request An Internship: Here are the step-by-step instructions to help you complete the Handshake application. Please ensure you completed the workshop and have an internship before filling out the Handshake application.
Please email dmca499@liberty.edu if you have any questions.
Apply for DMCA 499 Internship Class
*** We will begin reviewing applications in September for the Spring 2024 semester.
Even after taking the Workshop, students cannot independently add the DMCA 499 Internship class because of the prerequisites. Here’s the application process:
Attend an in-person or online internship workshop before applying for the DMCA 499 internship class. This is where you will receive detailed instructions about internships and an overview of the application procedure. Look for social media posts, web announcements, and digital signage in Green Hall throughout the semester announcing dates/times of the in-person workshops. The virtual workshop is always available (link above).
Land an Internship! Apply to several internship opportunities. You are likely to receive an offer if you are determined. Contact dmca499@liberty.edu if you are unsure that your internship opportunity fits your major study area.
Once you have an offer in hand, you must apply on Handshake to have your internship formally evaluated and approved through a vetting process. Your application and academic standing will be reviewed along with the specifics of the opportunity. If everything looks good, the Handshake request will enter into a digital signature approval process. When ready to apply, click the Handshake link below to “Request an Experience.” (See How To Request An Internship for instructions.) Be sure to use the “SCA – DMCA 499 Internship (for credit)” when asked for “Experience Type.”
Request an Experience on Handshake 
Approvals: After you, your internship site supervisor, and the Liberty Internship Coordinator sign off on your internship. The Faculty Internship Advisor will send your request for DMCA 499 registration to the Registrar.
Registration: The Registrar will now add you to the class (if your account is free from any holds).
Registration Deadlines
Handshake applications must be entered no less than 1-week before the Financial Check-In deadline for your selected semester. Based on the Registrar’s published academic calendar, residential and LUO internship sections run Fall, Spring, and Summer in 14-16-week (J-term) sections.
We are now accepting Summer/Fall 2023 Handshake applications. The Spring 2023 registration window has closed. 
*Because the prerequisite approvals and the contract take time to complete, you must give yourself plenty of time before the registration deadline. Contact Professor John Rost at dmca499@liberty.edu with any questions before the deadlines.
Credit Hours
Hours of Work
You need to work at least 180 hours for a 3-credit hour internship. You can register for more than three (3) credit hours – up to six (6), but each additional credit hour means you must do 60 more work hours. If you take on more than three (3) credit hours, the extra credits can be used to fulfill upper-level elective requirements on your Degree Completion Plan (DCP). The first three (3) credits of DMCA 499 must be completed within your major – not your minor. You can only earn DMCA 499 Internship credit for experiences during the semester when you are registered for the course. There are no look-backs to previous experiences allowed.
Extended Internships
If you like your internship and want to keep doing it, you must fill out a new application for each semester you wish to earn course credit.
Getting Paid
You may get money for your internship, and we hope you do! You may be able to use your current job as your internship, but your job duties must match what you want to learn and be related to your primary area of study. The Faculty Internship Coordinator must approve the internship site and assignments at dmca499@liberty.edu.
Internship Site Responsibilities
You must be supervised by someone with a degree in your area of study or at least five years of professional experience in the field.
The company or organization must provide enough work to fill the work hour requirements agreed upon in the contract.
Your supervisor must agree to give feedback about your experience by filling out a mid and final evaluation.
Virtual internships are possible—Contact Prof. John Rost at dmca499@liberty.edu about applicable laws and regulations.
All internship opportunities are evaluated considering The Liberty Way – Student Honor Code. While Liberty students are expected to uphold the Code regardless of their location, internship sites will not be approved if they may cause the student to violate the honor code."
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/digital-media-journalism/90-point-9-the-light-college-radio-station/","Christian Radio Station
Train for live broadcasting or behind the scenes station work at 90.9 The Light, a Top 40 College Christian music radio station located right here on the Liberty University campus. Apply what you learn in the classroom, and help “shine the Light of God’s love throughout Central Virginia” through radio.
90.9 The Light reaches up to 200,000 potential listeners in Lynchburg and surrounding counties. The station broadcasts Christian music and Liberty University athletics
Hands-On Experience for Students
Gain exposure to every aspect of radio station work
Build your resume
Train with state-of-the-art audio equipment and software
Student Opportunities
News
Sports
Music
Sales
Production
Office management
Social media"
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/2023/08/25/public-health-team-serves-remote-and-poor-communities-on-trip-to-central-america/","August 25, 2023 : By Ryan Klinker - Office of Communications & Public Engagement 
The team from Liberty in Honduras:(Left to right) MPH student Nicole Durham, Department of Public & Community Health chair Dr. Oswald Attin, online MPH program director Dr. Gineska Castillo, and rising junior Grace Sibert 
Two professors and two students from Liberty University’s Department of Public & Community Health spent nine days in the Central American countries of Guatemala and Honduras last month as part of a continuous effort to screen and treat those in Hispanic communities affected by poor nutrition, water quality, and sanitation.
From July 10-18, department chair Dr. Oswald Attin and online Master of Public Health (MPH) program director Dr. Gineska Castillo led the trip with MPH student Nicole Durham and Grace Sibert, a rising junior in the accelerated B.S. in Public Health to MPH (4+1) program. They visited HierbaBuena, a remote Guatemalan village on top of a mountain, and an area around Copan Ruinas in Honduras. By the end of the trip, they had screened 535 people of varying ages, including children.
The trip was supported by Liberty’s Center for Research & Scholarship, and two Spanish churches — Iglesia Vida in Sunrise, Fla., and Iglesia de las Americas in Lynchburg — sent members to assist the group. The department has sent a team to Guatemala the last two years, partnering with the local nonprofit Manos Unidas in Guatemala. This year, they found a new connection with Urban Promise, a children and youth ministry in Honduras.
“Every year, God is showing something different,” Attin said. “It’s not about going and making ourselves feel good; it’s about asking the Lord to show us what He wants us to do. God sends us where He wants us, and He uses us to speak to others.”
A patient’s blood is tested at a clinic in HierbaBuena, Guatemala 
“Year after year, the transformative impact of our missions with the public health teams in Guatemala and other countries like Honduras continues to unfold in new and profound ways,” Castillo added. “These trips exceed ordinary visits; they represent an unwavering commitment to understanding, empathizing with, and empowering the communities we serve. Seeing those community members expecting us in every village, traveling and walking from other remote places, is astonishing.”
In HierbaBuena, the locals do not receive any resources from the government and have little to no potable water, which Attin said contributed to hydration and nutritional issues, some so severe that the act of drawing blood was difficult.
Durham recalled the drive up the mountain and the experience of helping a population that might have otherwise continued to go unreached and untreated.
“Seeing that people lived at such an altitude and away from civilization and away from a clean water source was a bit of a shock to me,” she said. “After we finished the day and were riding back down the mountain, I thought of how crazy it is that these people do not normally get reached from missions and medical groups because of the remote location. If we did not go to give a medical checkup or give resources to them, I do not think anyone would.”
Despite Copan Ruinas being a tourist destination, the surrounding area has many poor communities, and Attin said they encountered people with high cholesterol and high blood pressure.
Sibert has been involved with Attin’s research since her freshman year, including giving presentations during Liberty’s Research Week and at the American Public Health Association Conference. This was her first medical trip with Attin, which allowed her to see the study being carried out firsthand.
“While before I was able to understand and become passionate about the research, now I had a personal connection and experiences myself,” she said. “We were able to share the love of Christ through providing healthcare, playing with the kids, and praying for those who were struggling.”
She presented her testimony through a translator at a church in Guatemala, something she’d never done in front of an audience before, and she said she felt the Lord’s presence even when the language being spoken around her wasn’t her own.
“Even though the church was in Spanish, and I do not speak or understand Spanish particularly well, I felt so connected to the Lord. I could tell everyone in that church loved God so much; they were filled with such joy,” she said.
The language barrier was also a concern for Durham, but she soon found a similar comfort in allowing the Lord to use her actions when words weren’t easy to share.
The entire team, including people from churches and local nonprofits, in Honduras 
“Each person I helped at my (clinic) table, I wanted to get to know them more and ask questions about how they were,” Durham said. “Through this, the Lord taught me the sweetness of being able to be few in my words, smile, and serve the people in front of me with the resources that He had provided. This was an opportunity to show the love of God to others just as Jesus did.”
Sibert and Attin wrote an article about the work being done on these trips that has been approved for publishing in the Virginia Journal of Public Health, a peer reviewed journal for the Virginia Public Health Association.
“This research has a special place in my heart, so I am thankful that I get to share my passion for this work and these communities through manuscripts and additional research,” Sibert said. “I hope that in the future we are able to bring even more awareness to the importance of pouring into indigenous and rural communities.”
Attin said because of their work, some of the people he has met in Guatemala have told him they were inspired to pursue medicine as a career and make an impact in their own communities.
“Some of them told me that going into (the medical profession) wasn’t even on their radar until we talked to them and they helped us on past trips,” Attin said. “They’ve now started to do screenings themselves in areas that we haven’t gone to. That’s really been a blessing, seeing how we’ve been able to pass along that ability to care for the people there and inspire them to go to medical school or nursing school. That’s what we want to do in public health: we go, we train, we show, and then that continues after we’ve left.”
Attin and others from Liberty will continue their outreach to Hispanic communities here in the U.S. They will conduct screenings in association with the Virginia Poverty Law Center and Virginia Department of Health at a Hispanic Festival on Sept. 18 in Danville, Va. Next July, Attin and Castillo plan to lead a trip to Antigua, Guatemala, with students and a larger team of medical professionals.
“We always want to thank CRS for believing in this project and Dean (Heidi) DiFrancesca in the School of Health Sciences for allowing us to continue doing this,” Attin said. “We are having an impact, and we hope to continue to go with students and train community health workers wherever we go.”"
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/all-news/","Government students take part in Stanford’s Hoover Institution boot camp 
Two Liberty University Helms School of Government students participated in the Hoover Institution Summer Policy Boot Camp at Stanford University Aug. 13-17, gaining valuable instruction and advice from prominent professionals as they prepare to enter the field of government themselves….
1 day ago"
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/press_release/acbsp-reaffirms-accreditation-for-liberty-university-business-programs/","July 21, 2023 : By Office of Communications & Public Engagement 
The Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP) Baccalaureate/Graduate Degree Board of Commissioners recently reaffirmed accreditation of the business programs offered through the Liberty University School of Business.
ACBSP accreditation certifies that the teaching and learning processes within the business degrees and programs offered through Liberty meet the rigorous educational standards established by ACBSP.
“This reaffirmation demonstrates the continued focus that the university places on preparing students for future success in the business world,” said Liberty School of Business Director of Assessment and Accreditation Jamie Stowe. “By receiving an ACBSP-accredited education from Liberty, students are better equipped to compete in today’s workplace and to serve their local communities as the next generation of business leaders.”
Liberty’s business programs were first accredited by ACBSP in 2013. The reaffirmation process is required every 10 years to maintain ACBSP accreditation.
“Liberty University has shown its commitment to teaching excellence and to the process of quality improvement by participating in the accreditation process,” said ACBSP Chief Accreditation Officer Dr. Steve Parscale. “This reaffirmation of accreditation is evidence that they are committed to maintaining the highest quality business education for their students for the next 10 years, just as they have done since 2013.”
With more than 30 years of promoting excellence in global business program accreditation, ACBSP was the first organization offering specialized business accreditation for all degree levels, from associate to baccalaureate to doctoral degree programs.
Based on the Baldrige Education Criteria for Performance Excellence, ACBSP accreditation evaluates aspects of leadership, strategic planning, relationships with stakeholders, quality of academic programs, faculty credentials, and educational support to determine whether the business programs offer a rigorous educational experience and demonstrate continuous quality improvement.
The accreditation from ACBSP encompasses both Liberty’s residential and online programs.
ACBSP-accredited programs in the School of Business include associate and undergraduate degree programs in accounting, business administration, and information systems; Master of Business Administration; Master of Science in Accounting; and Doctor of Business Administration (DBA)."
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/press_release/liberty-athletics-makes-another-clean-sweep-of-asun-all-sport-awards/","July 21, 2023 : By Office of Communications & Public Engagement 
Following another highly successful season in the ASUN Conference, the league has awarded Liberty Athletics all three of its All-Sports trophies.
During the conclusion of the conference’s annual spring meetings this week, the ASUN Conference released that Liberty Athletics has been awarded the Bill Bibb Trophy (overall all-sports champion), Jesse C. Fletcher Trophy (men’s all-sport champion) and the Sherman Day Trophy (women’s all-sport champion).
Liberty Athletics has swept all three All-Sport trophies each year the conference has presented the award during the Flames’ five-year run as a conference member: 2018-19, 2021-22 and 2022-23.
The league did not award any All-Sport trophies during the 2019-20 and 2020-21 athletics seasons due to the cancellation and disruption of the seasons caused by COVID-19.
Liberty claimed 90.4 percent of possible points in the Bill Bibb Trophy race (537-of-594), finishing ahead of second-place Lipscomb (71.56 percent/453-of-633 points).
The Flames won the Jesse C. Fletcher Trophy with 85.48 percent of possible points (238.5-of-279), finishing ahead of Kennesaw State in the Men’s All-Sport standings (68.45 percent/172.5-of-252).
The Lady Flames won the Sherman Day Trophy with 94.76 percent of possible points (298.5-of-315), finishing ahead of FGCU in the Women’s All-Sport standings (79.81 percent/249-of-312).
This is the 17th time Liberty Athletics has been awarded a conference All-Sport trophy since the 1997-98 athletic year (spans 26 seasons, two of which an award was not presented).
The Flames also won the Big South Conference’s George F. “Buddy” Sasser Cup Trophy 14 times from 1997-98 through 2017-18, when Liberty left the league to join the ASUN Conference.
During the Flames’ fifth and final season as a member of the ASUN Conference, Liberty claimed conference titles in men’s golf, men’s indoor track & field, men’s outdoor track & field, women’s indoor track & field and women’s outdoor track & field.
Liberty also claimed ASUN regular season titles in men’s basketball, men’s tennis, volleyball, women’s lacrosse and women’s soccer."
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/2023/08/09/liberty-leaders-cut-the-ribbon-on-new-120000-square-foot-dining-center-a-celebration-of-quality-service-and-gods-blessings/","August 9, 2023 : By Christian Shields - Office of Communications & Public Engagement 
Hundreds of Liberty University faculty, staff, students, and members of administration, as well as several prominent Lynchburg officials and representatives from Sodexo, the university’s dining services provider, gathered for a ribbon cutting ceremony at the new Reber-Thomas Dining Center on Wednesday.
Liberty administration posed in front of the new Reber-Thomas Dining Center with members of the Reber and Thomas families as well as Lynchburg officials. (Photo by Joel Coleman) 
The ceremony included remarks from newly appointed Liberty President Maj. Gen. (Ret.) Dondi E. Costin, Ph.D., Chancellor Jonathan Falwell, and other members of Liberty leadership. Special guests included Lynchburg Mayor Stephanie Reed and members of the Reber and Thomas families, the center’s namesakes.
The two-story, 120,000-square-foot facility boasts a seating capacity of more than 3,000 (outdoor and indoor seating) and 27 different stations with a variety of food options. It also includes a gluten-free bake shop, an allergen-free room, and chef stations for teaching culinary arts. The center opened its doors this week in preparation for the start of the Fall 2023 semester. Classes begin on Aug. 21.
Louis Cambeletta, vice president for Auxiliary Services at Liberty, harkened back to the belief held by Liberty founder Dr. Jerry Falwell that “If it’s Christian, it ought to be better.”
“This building, along with several other buildings on campus, make that statement really clear,” he said. “(Falwell’s) vision was that if we build something or do something, it should be the best. This will be the premiere dining hall in the country. There is not another college campus in the country that has anything like this.”
Falwell noted the college’s growth over the last few decades and the continued commitment that the school has made to achieving excellence in every area.
“To see what it is today and the great work that has gone into this campus, building and developing the beautiful facilities, there is no other college campus like it on the face of the earth,” Falwell said. “I firmly believe that. We are blessed here and blessed that the leadership has brought us to this point. But most importantly, we are blessed by the people who have come alongside and helped make all of this a reality.”
(Photo by Matt Reynolds) 
Costin said when he first toured the completed facility, he called it the “EPCOT center of dining halls.” Together with Falwell, he acknowledged and thanked members of the Reber and Thomas families, who willingly donated to the university to supply the school with a cafeteria at a time when few other people wanted to support the endeavor. In 1992, Dan Reber and Jimmy Thomas Sr., two local businessmen, donated $1.4 million, the remaining funds that Liberty needed to complete The Food Court at Reber-Thomas, the university’s first large dining facility.
“Your name on this building says a whole lot, not just about you, it says a whole lot about all the hundreds of thousands of students who will walk through these doors several times a day for four years and who will then go off and do great things for God,” Costin said to the Reber and Thomas families. “Everything that they do will be credited to your account.”
In an interview after the ceremony, Duke Davis, district manager for Sodexo, said the new building and its operations created 100 new jobs for the city.
“We have close to 900 employees (working for Sodexo at Liberty), and we pride ourselves on giving jobs to the community,” he said. “One of the exciting things about this building is having 27 dining platforms. It creates a lot more job opportunities for people in town. We just love the size of this building to really serve our students the way they need to be served.”
(Photo by Elliot Miller) 
Students were excited to try the new dining facility.
“The building is beautiful and looks amazing,” Liberty student Ezekiel Coley said while enjoying flavored soft serve ice cream, an addition to the dining options.
Junior Anna Turpin said she appreciated the willingness of university leadership to listen to the needs of the student body as they planned the facility.
“There have been a lot of students who have shown interest in wanting to expand the dining hall, and it’s awesome that they took that into consideration and provided a way for more of us to fit in the dining hall at once,” she said.
With the new dining center, the university emphasizes its goal of preparing students to wholeheartedly serve Christ with their lives.
“We have been blessed beyond measure, but our work is not done,” Falwell said. “We are firmly committed and dedicated to the original mission that (students) are going to come here to get a great education, they are going to get some great meals, they are going to attend some great athletic and recreational events. But above all else, we are committed to the fact that when they come here, they are going to become Champions for Christ in whatever field it is, to go out and reach the world with the (Gospel).”
Liberty Dining Services will host a grand opening event 11:30 a.m.–2:30 p.m. Aug. 23 featuring vendors and giveaways for students.
(Photo by Matt Reynolds) (Photo by Joel Coleman) (Photo by Matt Reynolds) (Photo by Joel Coleman)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/digital-media-journalism/faculty/","Faculty & Staff
Contact Digital Media & Journalism faculty and staff by emailing DMAJ@liberty.edu
Administrative Faculty
Faculty
See all Program Directors listed by school and program name.
Dr. Bruce Kirk
Associate Professor, Digital Media and Journalism
Dr. Carey Martin
Professor, Digital Media and Journalism

Dr. Richard Previte
Assistant Professor, Digital Media and Journalism

Toni Perry
Instructor, Digital Media and Journalism
Roger Rome
Associate Professor, Digital Media and Journalism
Rashad Gopee
Instructor, Digital Media and Journalism
Staff

Malinda Price
Administrative Assistant

Jason Prill
Digital Media Lab Supervisor/Studio Support
Steven Stilwell
General Manager – 90.9FM The Light"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/","Study Communication & the Arts at a Christian University
Learn. Do. Go. — Your Dream Could Be Just a Degree Away
Where do you see yourself in your career? Are you designing a campaign, on stage, or maybe on the set directing a major motion picture? Or, are you working in the high-energy fields of television and radio production, advertising and public relations, or broadcast and print journalism? Whatever your goals, the School of Communication & the Arts (SCA) at Liberty University can help you reach them. With our five career-focused departments, we’ll help you get what it takes for success as a Christian professional in today’s job market. Enhance your skills while working in our state-of-the-art studios, theatres, and post-production facilities. Learn from degreed professors who are working professionals grounded in their Christian faith.
Here, you’ll also get hands-on learning and networking opportunities in our:
on-site professional theatre company
annual film productions
radio and television stations
on-campus sports network
client promotional projects
student-run public relations firm and newspaper
Participate in the field while you are working on your degree. And join a long list of successful alumni who have followed their dreams in exciting places like ESPN, Conde Nasté, Hallmark, Fox News, and the Motion Picture Association of America.
Start Your Journey as a Student at Liberty
Cinematic Arts
Home
Degree Programs 
Minors
Experiential Learning 
Producing
Directing
Screenwriting
Cinematography & more
Digital Media & Journalism
Home
Degree Programs 
Bachelor’s Degrees
Minors
Student Opportunities 
90.9 The Light
Liberty Champion
Studio & Digital Arts
Home
Degree Programs 
Bachelor’s Degrees
Master’s Degrees
Minors
Art Gallery
Student Art Clubs
Theatre Arts
Home
Degree Programs 
Bachelor’s Degrees
Minors
Alluvion Stage Company
Tower Theater
Productions and Awards
Instagram"
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/press_release/liberty-university-announces-leadership-changes-in-academic-administration/","July 21, 2023 : By Office of Communications & Public Engagement 
Liberty University is pleased to announce that Drs. Don Raleigh, Dave Brat, and Rich Diddams have been appointed to new leadership roles in academic administration ahead of the upcoming 2023-24 academic year.
Raleigh, Senior Associate Dean for Academic Operations at Liberty University College of Osteopathic Medicine (LUCOM), will be Dean of the School of Education. Brat, Dean of the School of Business and former Congressman, will serve as Vice Provost for Engagement and Public Relations. Diddams will expand his role as the Vice Provost of Engineering and Technology & Professional Engagement by serving as the Interim Dean for the School of Business.
These changes will ensure Liberty’s missional and operational success while the university continues to enjoy historic growth in enrollment and even greater opportunity for students.
“Don Raleigh, Rich Diddams, and Dave Brat’s extensive leadership backgrounds in academia, public service, and business make each of them exceptional fits for these crucial roles in academic administration. Each of their unique abilities will certainly serve to advance the university’s commitment to Train Champions for Christ,” said Dr. Scott Hicks, Provost and Chief Academic Officer.
Dr. Raleigh has decades of experience within K-12 education, serving in various roles as administrator, teacher, and coach. Prior to his role at LUCOM, Raleigh served as the superintendent of Pryor Public Schools for 13 years, where he was named the 2017 Oklahoma Association School Administrators (OASA) Superintendent of the Year and the OASA District 6 Superintendent of the Year three times (2012, 2015, 2017). Dr. Joe Wiegand’s service as the Interim Dean of the School of Education has been greatly appreciated as he graciously stepped in to serve in a crucial role during the past academic year.
Dr. Brat will bring his business, political, and academic expertise to enhance the university’s commitment to excellence in community outreach and public engagement. He will strategically advance and promote the university’s educational goals and objectives.
Dr. Diddams’ extensive and decorated military service and his successful business background will prove to add significant value to the School of Business."
"https://www.liberty.edu/champion/","Student Activities hosts late-night bingo game with prizes
Pajama-clad students packed the LaHaye Event Space, chattered about the game, bent over their bingo cards and held their breaths in anticipation of the next number called. Liberty University’s Student […]
Read more » 
The ‘wow factor’ (featuring Philip and Foreigner)
I think the disciple Philip was a big Foreigner fan. But I’ll get to that in a minute. First, remember when Jesus rebukes the Pharisees and Sadducees for asking for […]
Read more » 
The FDA should rethink what ‘safe’ means
Congress established The Food and Drug Administration in 1906 when it passed the Pure Food and Drug Act. The purpose of the administration was to regulate the additives placed in […]
Read more » 
Nursing student serves those in nursing home by making connections with them
Opportunities to spread the love of Christ are everywhere, but finding them can be difficult, especially in the bubble of a Christian campus. Junior nursing student Josie Camiola found a […]
Read more » 
Flames wow in opener, notching five interceptions to defeat Bowling Green
The Liberty Flames kicked their season off with a bang, defeating the Bowling Green Falcons 34-24 in their season opener. In his initial contest as the Flames head coach, Jamey […]
Read more » 
News
Fresh food stand visits campus
Peaches, sweet potatoes, apples and more will be featured at the mini farmers market known as the Produce Stand, hosted by Sodexo Sept. 8 from […]
Sports
Feature
Opinion/Editorial"
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/photos/","Press Photos
Photographing Facilities
Photography of Liberty University facilities for commercial or media usage is prohibited unless authorized by Liberty University. Use of photographs in articles and publications, brochures and other printed media may not be done without permission from Liberty. Any party seeking authority to photograph Liberty facilities must contact the University Marketing Office at (434) 582-7602 for permission. If permission is granted for photography, the firm benefiting from the photography will give rights to use of the image to Liberty University.
Photos Available for Download
Jerry Prevo
Liberty University’s 50th Anniversary, 2021-22

School of Business

Main Campus

LaHaye Student Union

Liberty Baseball Stadium
Liberty University Campus and Facilities

Aerial View of Campus

Freedom Tower

Freedom Tower Interior

Freedom Tower at Night

Liberty University Monogram

Football in Williams Stadium

School of Business

Arthur S. DeMoss Hall

Liberty Natatorium

Liberty Natatorium

Marie F. Green Hall

Jerry Falwell Library

Jerry Falwell Library

Jerry Falwell Library

Automated Storage Retrieval System, Jerry Falwell Library

Caudell Reading Room, Jerry Falwell Library

Campus Bookstore

Campus Bookstore Entrance

Hancock Welcome Center

Hancock Welcome Center

Jerry Falwell Memorial

Jerry Falwell Memorial

Prayer Chapel

School of Law Supreme Courtroom

School of Law Entrance

Liberty University Online

Aviation Students in Hangar

Tilley Student Center

Snowflex Centre at Night

Equestrian Center

Liberty Mountain Trail System

Basketball Court in Liberty Arena

LaHaye Ice Center

Worthington Baseball Stadium

LaHaye Student Union

Residential Commons

Center for Medical and Health Sciences

Baskin-Robbins and Dunkin’ Donuts

Center for Natural Sciences

Center for Natural Sciences Entrance

Academic Buildings

School of Music

School of Music Concert Hall

Montview Student Union, Freedom Tower

Academic Lawn

Academic Lawn
Liberty Flames Athletics
Liberty Arena
Liberty Arena, interior

Indoor Tennis Center

Liberty Athletics Center

Liberty Athletics Center Interior

Liberty Athletics Center Weight Room

Indoor Track

Indoor Track

Natatorium

Flames Football Action

Flames Football

Flames Football

Flames Football

Sparky with Fans

Williams Stadium

Sparky

Men’s Soccer

Lady Flames Soccer

Softball Game

Men’s Lacrosse

Women’s Lacrosse

Track Team

Hockey at LaHaye Ice Center

Liberty Mountain Snowflex Centre

Basketball Game in the Vines Center
Campus Events

Convocation

Military Emphasis Week

Campus Community

Commencement

Graduates at Commencement
Liberty Student Life

Students Skateboard on the Academic Lawn

Students at Block Party

Students sit on Academic Lawn

Students Volunteering

Classroom in Freedom Tower"
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/about/","Liberty's first radio station
WQLU is the student-run radio station at Liberty University with a long, and somewhat miraculous, history. The station began with a student magazine fund drive in the early days of what was then Liberty Baptist College. Starting with $1,000 raised through the drive, the station began operations in February 1980 as WLBU, Liberty’s first radio station.
550 AM
For more than ten years it operated at 550 on the AM radio dial and reached only one or two dormitories on the campus through closed circuit communications. As the campus grew and more and more dormitories were built it became clear that expansion of the station was needed in order to reach the growing off-campus student population.
The Frequency of 90.9 FM
On October 8, 1992, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) granted Liberty University a permit for a 100 watt station at the frequency of 90.9 FM. The station then chose as their call letters WWMC, (Wall-to-Wall-MusiC), but was more commonly called C-91. The station could then be heard by listeners in Lynchburg and as far away as Roanoke, VA–45 miles away.
C-91 began broadcasting at 10:15 in the morning on February 1, 1993 following a dedication ceremony at Liberty University’s convocation service. The station was the only Contemporary Christian station in central Virginia for several years. Because students weren’t able to operate the station 24 hours a day, WWMC went off the air at midnight. A Christian music network from Boston was used to fill the hours overnight.
Transmitter Fire
Then tragedy struck. In June 1993, a fire destroyed the transmitters for both C-91 and WTLU television at the antenna site on Liberty Mountain. The stations remained off the air until August when repairs were finally made.
In December 1993, a Contemporary Christian network, The Word In Music, helped C-91 to fill the hours when student DJ’s were not available.
The Light
In August 1995, the station added a new suffix to their name, “The Light.” This was chosen as a symbol of the station’s desire to shine the Light of God’s love throughout Central Virginia. Philemon 1:6 was chosen as the station’s theme verse: “that the sharing of your faith may become effective by the acknowledgment of every good thing which is in you in Christ Jesus.” (NKJV)
Christian Hit Radio
In the summer of 1999, the station switched its network affiliation to Christian Hit Radio giving it an upbeat, Top-40 sound. With this move, the station appealed more to the area’s growing high school and college audience. Later in 2000, a significant donation from retired Liberty faculty member Ann Wharton and her husband, Jim, made independent station operation possible 24/7. This, for the first time, gave the station a consistent overall “sound” day and night year ’round including semester breaks and summer months when the student staff were away.
Light-a-thon
The station then held its first Light-a-thon fundraiser in 2002 and the listener contributions received allowed the station to further automate programming. In the summer of 2003, The Light changed from using a satellite service to being fully automated locally. This allowed the station to play a college style of music all day. Thus, C-91 became 90.9 FM The Light, which we remain today.
More Programming
In the early 2000’s, The Light added several specialty programs, including Liberty Church Services, an Urban Show, a Top-30 Program, Sports Talk, Political Talk, a counseling program and much more. In 2004, those programs were extended to other genres such as Classical music and Gospel.
WQLU
In the Spring of 2015, the station changed its call letters to WQLU. The new call sign was selected to help listeners more readily connect the station to Liberty University, and to provide a new marketing identity for the station."
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/programming/","Feb 6th, 2 p.m. – 5 p.m.
Women’s Basketball at North Florida
Feb 6th, 6 p.m. – 8 p.m.
Men’s D2 Hockey vs East Texas Baptist
Feb 7th, 2 p.m. – 5 p.m.
Women’s Basketball at North Florida
Feb 7th, 1:30 p.m. – 3:30 p.m. / Facebook Live
Men’s D2 Hockey vs East Texas Baptist"
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/events/","Skip to content
Concerts & Events
Check out what's coming up in the area
Go to Top"
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/underwriters/","“We’re looking for Businesses to introduce to Central Virginia. Our sponsors receive 10 announcements per week, live mentions, and more. Call for details.”"
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/get-involved/","90.9 provides an active, Godly work environment. Our DJs and staff get hands-on training, giving them ‘real world’ experience. If you are interested in getting involved with the station, take a look at staff opportunities below. If you would like to come in for a visit, feel free to stop by our station.
Student Opportunities
This is a great way to build your resume and gain experience that will help you in your pursuit of a career in media. Students with interest in the following areas are encouraged to apply:
Music Programming
Sportscasting
Promotions / PR
Audio Production
Newscasting
Office Manager / Public Service
These are not full time paid positions. Management positions are scholarship compensated, based on the amount raised during the annual Light-a-thon (between $200-600 per semester on average, depending on the position.) Lab Attendant and Office Manager positions are either Work Study or International Scholarship. Position descriptions are on the application. The requirements to be considered for a position are as follows:
Liberty students in good standing
Radio experience is beneficial, but not required
Willingness to learn and serve
Preference will be given to COMS majors
CSER Opportunities
CSER volunteers are welcome year-round! If you are interested, please contact us."
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/sports/","Skip to content 
Programming
Sports
Events
Underwriters
Get Involved
About
Our Team
Blog
Contact
Sports
Listen to your Liberty Flames Athletics from anywhere!
Your Flames Sports Network
90.9 FM The Light broadcasts Liberty University Athletics as a member of the Liberty Flames Broadcast Experience. The Light currently airs all Lady Flames basketball games, home Men’s D1 hockey games, and select home baseball and softball contests.
Our station also airs select Liberty Christian Academy (LCA) athletic events and weekly sports talk shows. The Journey FM is the flagship of the network and broadcasts programming on 88.3 FM and the Internet.
Sponsorship & Donations
You can reach our wide audience while supporting FSN
Business Advertising
Air time and website recognition are offered with business sponsorship. There are many packages available, including Pre- Game Show Sponsorship, Half-time Show Sponsorship, Player of the Game and much more.
Individual Donations
As an individual, donations to our radio station are tax deductible. If you would like to see our radio broadcasts continue, please prayerfully consider making a contribution.
For more information please contact us at 434-582-2452 or on our Contact page.
Sports Programming
90.9 is home to weekly sports talk and various local sporting events.
The Waterboys
Jason Prill and his cast of characters invade 90.9 every Saturday at 10:00 AM to discuss the week in Liberty, local, and national sports. This show is the training ground for the new faces of 90.9, and will include normal people who just have that same burning passion for sports.
The Ballboys
Immediately after The Waterboys, tune in to listen to Sports Director Joshua Lipowski give his own take about the week in the world of Liberty and national sports. Joshua will also train more of the new faces of 90.9 The Light!
LCA Athletics
90.9 is your exclusive home for select LCA Bulldogs athletic events throughout the year. From LCA Football Fridays to LCA Boys and Girls Basketball to LCA Baseball.
Liberty Hockey
All home Men’s D1 Hockey Games will be available on 90.9 The Light! Tune in as the Flames look for another run at a National Championship!
What's up With LU Sports?
Liberty’s Momentum Grinds to a Halt
All good things must come to an end, and Liberty’s dream undefeated season was deflected and rolled softly to a stop in the North endzone at Carter-Finley Stadium in Raleigh, North Carolina on Saturday evening. An uncharacteristically off day from Senior Quarterback Malik Willis and the Flames offense led to a heartbreaking 15-14 loss…
Read more
Liberty Dominates Western Carolina
The Liberty Flames were a 33.5 point favorite over the Western Carolina Catamounts on Saturday, and they covered the spread and then some. The Flames controlled the game from the outset jumping out to a 14-0 lead in the second quarter before cruising to a 58-14 win. Even though the Flames got the win, Head…
Read more
7-0! Liberty is the Real Deal
And the kick is true! After being ranked #25 for the first time in school history, Liberty traveled to Virginia Tech in a back and forth, grind it out game. It was a 38-35 victory over Virginia Tech Hokies football team on Senior Place Kicker Alex Birbir’s 51-yard field goal with one second left. “It…
Read more
Malik Matches his Number.
The Liberty Flames are 6-0, but Senior Quarterback Malik Willis was the one who stole the show. Malik Willis channeled his inner Lebron James by getting not one, not two, not three, not four, not five, not six, but seven touchdowns during Liberty’s 56-35 win over the Southern Mississippi Golden Eagles. Six of those…
Read more
A. C.ompletely C.ommanding Victory
For the first time in program history, the Liberty Flames took on an ACC opponent and came out on top with a convincing 38-21 win over Syracuse University at the Carrier Dome. The win also moved Liberty to 5-0 for the first time since 2008. “I’ve said ever since I was hired here, I like…
Read more
4-0 and Rolling!
Liberty football fans can celebrate as the Flames move to 4-0 heading into Syracuse. Overall, it was a blowout as Liberty won 40-7 with another stellar defensive effort. There is a lot of good, moving parts to the whole team right now. “Last week, we didn’t pass the test.” Head Coach Hugh Freeze stated,…
Read more
Liberty is 3-0!
The Liberty Flames defeated the UNA Lions in convincing fashion on Saturday by the score of 28-7. The win moved Liberty to 3-0 on the season as they continued their hot start. “Feeling great!” said Senior running back Joshua Mack, “I don’t think I’ve ever started 3-0 in my life besides high school, to start…
Read more
Flames Win Ugly vs FIU
The Liberty Flames welcomed fans back to Williams Stadium on Saturday afternoon, and treated them to a 36-34 nail-biting win over the FIU Panthers. Even though the scoreboard showed that the Flames had moved to 2-0, it was clear that there is a lot of work to do for this Flames team. “I think there are a lot of things…
Read more
Liberty Runs Over WKU
Courtesy of: Jesse Rogers The Liberty Flames got their season underway on Saturday in Bowling Green, Kentucky with a 30-24 victory over the Western Kentucky Hilltoppers. Junior Quarterback Malik Willis stole the show rushing for 168 yards (a Liberty quarterback record) and three of Liberty’s four touchdowns. This went along with an efficient day throwing the ball going 13 for 21 for 133…
Read more
Interviews
William Byron Interview
Sports Director Joshua Lipowski sits down with NASCAR Driver of the Number 24 Hendrick Motorsports Chevrolet and LU Online student William Byron to discuss sim racing, his education, and what to expect for the rest of the season. 
Read more
Matt Warner Interview
Sports Director Joshua Lipowski sits down with Liberty Basketball and Football Broadcaster and host of Flames Central Matt Warner to discuss time at Liberty, growth there, his love for Kansas City sports, and how he got into broadcasting. 
Read more
Kirk Handy Interview
Sports Director Joshua Lipowski sits down with Head Liberty Men’s D1 Hockey Coach Kirk Handy to discuss faith, the upcoming season, and his time here at Liberty. 
Read more
Carey Green Interview
Sports Director Joshua Lipowski sits down with Liberty Head Women’s Basketball Coach Carey Green to discuss his time at Liberty, his faith, and his love for the game of basketball!
Read more
Frank Rocco Interview
Sports Director Joshua Lipowski sits down with LCA Head Football Coach and Athletic Director Frank Rocco to discuss his time thus far at LCA, and expectations for what to see out of LCA Athletics for the future! 
Read more
Load more
Go to Top 
Notifications"
"https://www.liberty.edu/news/videos/","Liberty University Press Videos
Visit Liberty University’s official YouTube channel for more videos on the impact Liberty and its students are making across the globe.
Liberty Athletics
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
Liberty Highlights
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
Liberty Drone Highlights
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
Liberty Convocation
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
Liberty Construction
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>"
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/our-team/","Steve Stilwell
General Manager
Steve is the General Manager of 90.9FM The Light. He graduated from Azusa Pacific University in 2003 with his B.A. in Communications and his M.A. from Liberty in 2019 in Promotion and Video Content. He has been in the radio industry for over 20 years with stops at ESPN in Los Angeles, Fox Sports Radio Network. Steve wants to train the next generation of broadcasters and is excited to be a part of The Light.
Caleb is a senior from Maine studying Information Technology and has a minor in Digital Media Audio. He handles most of the technical problems at the 90.9 The Light and loves solving new problems. Caleb enjoys fixing and building computers in his free time and watching sports.
Chris is a senior at Liberty studying Digital Media and Journalism with a Performance focus. He enjoys debate, watching and playing basketball, and loves movies! He is originally from California and eventually wants to be a television news anchor. As the News Director for 90.9, his favorite part of his job is being able to help the community as a voice for Christ at the station and being able to train CSERs who have a strong desire to produce content!
Christian Martinez
Lab Attendant
Christian is from Bogotá, Colombia, and is a second-semester sophomore at Liberty, studying Digital Media: Video. He is a Lab Attendant and developer of videos and graphics for 90.9 the Light. For fun, he records and edits videos, and he loves video games and skating. This year, Christian is excited to have new opportunities to learn and grow while doing media.
David Hoffman
Sports Reporter
David is from Gettysburg, PA and is a junior at Liberty studying Digital Media: Performance. At the radio station, he is a Talent and a Lab Attendant! David enjoys running, listening to music, and creating content for his podcast “Behind The Catch Fence”. This year, he is most excited to see the expansion of the radio station over time.
Dylan Rolfsen
Programming Director
Dylan is a 2023 Liberty grad, majoring in Digital Media: Performance. He is from Indianapolis and enjoys writing and recording music. His role at the station is News Director, and this year he is excited to see what God does through the midst of all of the uncertainty (amen brother).
Josh Lipowski
Sports Director
Josh is from Indiana! He started at 90.9 as CSER helping out with sports broadcasts for LCA and Saturday morning sports talk, and has since risen to be Sports Director! Aside from being the Sports Director, he currently is the host of “The Ballboys”, a weekly sports talk show on 90.9. He also helps announce various LCA athletic events at the station and helps out with Liberty Hockey.
Sandy Sappington
Marketing Director
Sandy is from Virginia Beach, and a junior at Liberty! She’s the Director of Marketing and Promotions for 90.9 the Light! She is the one who runs the social media. A little about her-she’s a Strategic Communications major with a minor in Business. For fun, she does photography. This year, she is super excited for the marketing club, which she is a part of here at Liberty (American Marketing Association, Liberty Chapter!). Something interesting about her is that the first time she was ever up in a plane, she was flying it! Feel free to hit her up with any questions you may have about social media marketing, photography, or marketing!
Thomas Wilkerson
Lab Attendant
TJ, hailing from North Carolina, is the newest member at the station and a first-year graduate student at Liberty University, studying Communications and Broadcasting! He’s a Lab Attendant at 90.9 the Light and is a valuable asset to the team. In his free time, he likes to both play and watch sports, hang out with friends, and eat tacos. This year is he excited to get more involved at the station. An interesting fact about him is that he likes to write stories!
Juliana Moreno Daza
Lab Attendant
Juliana is a senior at Liberty, studying Psychology with a cognate in Criminal Psychology! She is a lab attendant at the radio station! She is from Bogotá, Columbia, and loves to hang out with friends and try new things!! “I wanna go into the criminal aspect of psychology, performing assessments or go into the clinical aspect and work with heavy mental disorders,” she says.
Jason Prill
Graduate Student Assistant
Jason graduated from Liberty University in Spring 2020 with a degree in Digital Media: Performance. He has returned as a Graduate Student Assistant for the department while pursuing a master’s in Strategic Communication. Jason was born and raised in Cleveland, OH and passionately follows their hometown sports teams. When he’s not working at the station, you can find him watching sports or hanging out with friends."
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/contact/","434-582-3691 (Office)
434-582-2909 (Studio)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/2021/04/22/","Michael W. Smith Interview
Join General Manager of 90.9 The Light, Steve Stilwell as he sits down with award-winning artist, Michael W. Smith."
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/blog/","Michael W. Smith Interview
Join General Manager of 90.9 The Light, Steve Stilwell as he sits down with award-winning artist, Michael W. Smith.
Liberty’s Momentum Grinds to a Halt
All good things must come to an end, and Liberty’s dream undefeated season was deflected and rolled softly to a stop in the North endzone at Carter-Finley Stadium in Raleigh, North Carolina on Saturday evening. An uncharacteristically off day from Senior Quarterback Malik Willis and the Flames offense led to a heartbreaking 15-14 loss…
Details 
Liberty Dominates Western Carolina
The Liberty Flames were a 33.5 point favorite over the Western Carolina Catamounts on Saturday, and they covered the spread and then some. The Flames controlled the game from the outset jumping out to a 14-0 lead in the second quarter before cruising to a 58-14 win. Even though the Flames got the win, Head…
Details 
7-0! Liberty is the Real Deal
And the kick is true! After being ranked #25 for the first time in school history, Liberty traveled to Virginia Tech in a back and forth, grind it out game. It was a 38-35 victory over Virginia Tech Hokies football team on Senior Place Kicker Alex Birbir’s 51-yard field goal with one second left. “It…
Details 
Exit 44 Interview
Some might hear “Exit 44” and think of a highway. But four gentleman heard a band name. Exit 44, a band comprised of four Liberty University students, sat down with 90.9 and provided insight into their music and their band chemistry. Konner Kennedy, Cody Hudler, Caleb Pearn, and Ryan Townsend have been friends for a…
Details 
Joseph O’Brien Interview
I got the opportunity to sit down and chat with a darling of Liberty University, Joseph O’Brien. As a member of the Liberty Worship Collective and a former contestant on America’s Got Talent, he had a lot to say. The ambitious 22-year old opened up about all things confidence, advice to new artists, and his…
Details 
Lynchburg Market
It’s no secret that pop-up shops, thrifting, and small businesses are all the rage these days. A college town like Lynchburg, VA is no exception when it comes to what’s trending. Founded by Macy Morehart and Lee Patton, “Lynchburg Market” is a pop-up bazaar where both local and out-of-state businesses, many of which are run…
Details 
Malik Matches his Number.
The Liberty Flames are 6-0, but Senior Quarterback Malik Willis was the one who stole the show. Malik Willis channeled his inner Lebron James by getting not one, not two, not three, not four, not five, not six, but seven touchdowns during Liberty’s 56-35 win over the Southern Mississippi Golden Eagles. Six of those…
Details 
A. C.ompletely C.ommanding Victory
For the first time in program history, the Liberty Flames took on an ACC opponent and came out on top with a convincing 38-21 win over Syracuse University at the Carrier Dome. The win also moved Liberty to 5-0 for the first time since 2008. “I’ve said ever since I was hired here, I like…
Details 
William Byron Interview
Sports Director Joshua Lipowski sits down with NASCAR Driver of the Number 24 Hendrick Motorsports Chevrolet and LU Online student William Byron to discuss sim racing, his education, and what to expect for the rest of the season. 
Details"
"https://www.liberty.edu/thelight/listen-live/","Search Posts 
Search: 
Recent Posts
Michael W. Smith Interview 
Liberty’s Momentum Grinds to a Halt 
Liberty Dominates Western Carolina 
7-0! Liberty is the Real Deal 
Exit 44 Interview"
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/2020/11/23/","Liberty’s Momentum Grinds to a Halt
All good things must come to an end, and Liberty’s dream undefeated season was deflected and rolled softly to a stop in the North endzone at Carter-Finley Stadium in Raleigh, North Carolina on Saturday evening. An uncharacteristically off day from Senior Quarterback Malik Willis and the Flames offense led to a heartbreaking 15-14 loss…"
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/2020/10/29/","Lynchburg Market
It’s no secret that pop-up shops, thrifting, and small businesses are all the rage these days. A college town like Lynchburg, VA is no exception when it comes to what’s trending. Founded by Macy Morehart and Lee Patton, “Lynchburg Market” is a pop-up bazaar where both local and out-of-state businesses, many of which are run…"
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/2020/10/15/","William Byron Interview
Sports Director Joshua Lipowski sits down with NASCAR Driver of the Number 24 Hendrick Motorsports Chevrolet and LU Online student William Byron to discuss sim racing, his education, and what to expect for the rest of the season. 
Matt Warner Interview
Sports Director Joshua Lipowski sits down with Liberty Basketball and Football Broadcaster and host of Flames Central Matt Warner to discuss time at Liberty, growth there, his love for Kansas City sports, and how he got into broadcasting. 
Kirk Handy Interview
Sports Director Joshua Lipowski sits down with Head Liberty Men’s D1 Hockey Coach Kirk Handy to discuss faith, the upcoming season, and his time here at Liberty. 
Carey Green Interview
Sports Director Joshua Lipowski sits down with Liberty Head Women’s Basketball Coach Carey Green to discuss his time at Liberty, his faith, and his love for the game of basketball!
Frank Rocco Interview
Sports Director Joshua Lipowski sits down with LCA Head Football Coach and Athletic Director Frank Rocco to discuss his time thus far at LCA, and expectations for what to see out of LCA Athletics for the future!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/the-light/2020/10/15/matt-warner-interview/","Sports Director Joshua Lipowski sits down with Liberty Basketball and Football Broadcaster and host of Flames Central Matt Warner to discuss time at Liberty, growth there, his love for Kansas City sports, and how he got into broadcasting. 
Author: Joshua Lipowski
Related Posts"
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/contact/","Office Information
Phone: (434) 592-5100
FAX: (434) 582-2187
E-mail: registrar@liberty.edu
Mailing Address:
Registrar’s Office
1971 University Boulevard
MSC Box 710177
Lynchburg, VA 24515
Location: Green Hall, Room 1896 – Student Service Center
Student Service Center Hours:
M-F 8:00 A.M. – 5:00 P.M.;
Closed for Convocation Wednesdays 9:30-11:30 A.M.
Call Center Hours:
Mon. & Wed.-Fri., 8 a.m.-4:45 p.m.
Tue., 8:30 a.m.-4:45 p.m.
Staff Listing"
"https://www.liberty.edu/commencement/?page_placement=global_header","Commencement 2024, May 9-11
2023 Commencement Main Ceremony
Friday, May 12 at 7:00 PM 
The Commencement ceremony is a formal ceremony that is held in recognition of all current graduates. Join us for an exciting celebration of our graduates while also commemorating Liberty University’s 50th graduating class.
Gates will open at Williams Stadium at 3:00 pm
Graduates will line up at the Osborne Soccer Stadium and will begin the graduate processional into Williams Stadium around 5:30 pm. Graduates should arrive no later than 4:30 pm
The Commencement Main Ceremony will begin at 7:00 pm
No tickets are required to attend the 2023 Commencement weekend activities.
What to Expect at Commencement
MAIN CEREMONY SPEAKER
Franklin Graham 
President and CEO of Samaritan's Purse and the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association
View Speaker Bio 
Countdown to the 51st Commencement"
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/forms/","Registrar-Forms
Additional Navigation
If you are a residential student seeking to withdraw from a course, you will need to contact your CASAS Advisor:
Visit your advisor to discuss withdrawing by scheduling an appointment
Email your withdrawal request to advising@liberty.edu (specify which course)
Commonly Used Student Forms
Add/Drop Form
Prerequisite Override Form (PROR)
Overload Request Form
Course Substitution Form
Change of Major/Minor
Dual Enrollment Request
Independent Study/Directed Research Form
Blackboard Coursework Extractor
Liberty Transcript Requests
Undergraduate Residential Repeat Policy
Student Enrollment Verification Request
Undergraduate – Resident Students
Prospective (New and Transfer students): Prospective Undergraduate Forms
Current: Transfer Course Request & Appeal Forms
Undergraduate – Online Students
LU Online Forms
Graduate Resident & Online Students
LU Online Forms
Department Forms
Blackboard Access Rights – email the Registrar’s office
Forms that do not appear on the website must be obtained from the Registrar’s Office or your Academic Advisor. 
Many forms apply only to residential programs and not to Liberty University Online programs, and vice versa. 
Please call (434) 592-5100 if you need additional information."
"https://www.liberty.edu/campusrec/clubsports/?page_placement=global_header","Skip to main content
Scoreboard
Dance
vs Liberty University Homecoming
Dance
vs Brigham Young University
Dance
vs Virginia Tech
Dance
vs New Mexico State University
Dance
vs Coffeehouse
Dance
vs University of Virginia
Dance
vs Concordia University Irvine
Dance
vs Dance Clinic & Tryouts
Cycling
at Mountain Bike Race
Cycling
at Mountain Bike Race
Racquetball
vs Tryouts
Ski & Snowboard
vs Tryouts
Beach Volleyball
vs AVCA Men's Alliance Fall Event
Men's D3 Hockey
at Potomac Patriots
Beach Volleyball
vs AVCA Men's Alliance Fall Event
Cycling
at Appalachian State University
Triathlon
at Patriots Triathlon
Beach Volleyball
vs AVCA Men's Alliance Fall Event
Cycling
at Appalachian State University
Ski & Snowboard
vs Tryouts
Stories
Countdown
vs
Men's D1 Hockey
vsNorth Carolina State University
Liberty University Club Sports Videos
Slideshow Grid"
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/course-fees/","Liberty Online
Residential"
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/change-of-major-or-minor/","Change of Major/Minor
You can declare or change your degree immediately upon entering Liberty University. Declaring or changing a degree does not imply acceptance into programs such as aviation, nursing, respiratory therapy, teacher licensure, or athletic training. Such programs have specific requirements before acceptance is granted.
Procedures for Declaring or Changing Your Degree or Minor
Visit the Change of Major/Minor online request form
Minors are not applicable for associate-level, graduate-level, post-graduate-level, doctoral-level, or certificate-seeking students.
Degrees/Minors changed after the start of classes of each semester will NOT be effective until the following semester.
Changes to your degree/minor will not be permitted once you start your final courses for the current semester and have a Degree Completion Application on file.
Residential Freshmen & Sophomores with questions about advising or course scheduling should check with their CASAS Professional Advisor.
Residential Juniors & Seniors with questions about advising or course scheduling should check with their Faculty Advisor.
All Online students with questions about advising or course scheduling should check with Academic Advising.
All Undergraduate students with questions about degree requirements should check with their Academic Evaluator.
All Graduate and Doctoral students with questions about degree requirements should check with their Academic Evaluator.
Special Notes
Virginia residents should verify that their VTAG will not be impacted prior to declaring or changing their major.
All students desiring to be placed on a degree plan they were previously pursuing must submit their appeal through the online form. You must be an active student (no broken enrollment/acceptance or degree conferred holds) before you are permitted to appeal. If you are an active student, you can locate the form at this link: https://apex.liberty.edu/banprd/f?p=253:14:::NO:RP:FORM_NAME:BACKDATED_DCP_APPEALS"
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/course-registration/","Course Registration
Residential Student Registration
You can register from your computer or mobile device using the Course Registration Tool.
Important Reminders
Registration dates, times, and policies apply to current residential students only.
Level classification is based upon successfully completed and in-progress courses.
Registration will be open online only for those who meet standard admission, advising, and registration criteria.
New students must complete FCI and assessments prior to registration.
Resident Advising Services
Advising Services can assist you with planning future semesters and setting goals for graduation. If you are unsure about what courses you should be registered for, this may be a good first step to ensure that you register for classes that will be most beneficial in the completion of your degree and academic goals. Visit the CASAS webpage for more information on advising services and to set up an appointment. Please note, you as the student are responsible for verifying that the course(s) you are taking are required for degree completion. Financial Aid may not be given for courses that are not needed for your degree(s). In addition, your degree will be conferred once all degree requirements have been successfully completed.
Residential Registration Schedule
8 Week Residential Classes
Summer 2023 Registration Schedule
Fall 2023 Registration Schedule
Spring 2024 Registration Schedule
Online Students – Please see the Liberty University Online Academic Calendar.
Course Registration
Visit the How To page for Course Registration. This page has instructional videos and helpful tips when using this tool.
Waitlist Registration
Online Course Registration for Residential Students
Online Terms:
A-Term – Full 16 weeks
B-Term – First 8 weeks
C-Term – Middle 8 weeks
D-Term – Last 8 weeks
Due to the compacted structure of online courses, only students with a 2.0 GPA or higher will be eligible to register using the Course Registration Tool. Please note, that residential courses that are available to resident students as either a hybrid or in a strictly online format do not fall under these restrictions. Registering for an online course has the potential to cause a change to your student account, financial aid, visa status, military benefits, or NCAA status. Please check with the below points of contact to verify registration in an online course will not cause any negative changes to your account:
Student Financial Services
International Student Center
NCAA
Military Affairs
Financial Check-In (FCI)
Complete Financial Check-In
Financial Check-In confirms your courses and financial arrangements, as well as housing and dining if applicable. It is important to complete this online process every semester – even if you have a 0 balance, payment arrangement, or are a faculty/staff member. It is recommended that returning students complete FCI during their assigned registration time. Be sure not to miss the FCI deadline, because your courses may be dropped and a late fee applied. To ensure you do not miss the deadlines, please visit Student Financial Services’ page with more information on FCI. You can also view payment plan options here.
Attendance
Regular attendance in courses is expected throughout the length of the term and/or sub-terms. The U.S. Department of Education requires that every university monitor the attendance of its students. For information about what constitutes as attendance, you can view our Policies and Procedures page.
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government Web site at https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/diplomas/","Liberty University Diplomas
When will I get my diploma?
Diplomas are processed within 2-4 weeks of degree conferral. After processing, diplomas are delivered within 1-2 weeks. This means a diploma will be delivered within 3-6 weeks from the date of conferral.
Diplomas are mailed to the address indicated on the degree completion application. If your address changes after submitting your degree completion application, please email diplomas@liberty.edu with your updated address.
Diplomas cannot be sent while there are outstanding financial obligations to the university. If a student does have an outstanding balance, they must rectify it before their diploma will be sent. Once rectified, the student must contact diplomas@liberty.edu for the diploma to be sent. 
What will my diploma say?
All diplomas will have the student’s name, degree (Associate, Bachelor, Master or Doctoral), major, and date. Minors do not appear on the diploma.
All Undergraduate and Graduate students will have the words “Liberty University” written on the diploma. 
Reissued diplomas and certificates carry signatures of the current officeholders (e.g., Provost and President) 
The signature lines vary within the university.
To what address will my diploma be sent?
The address indicated on the graduate application is the address used for shipping.
If your name or address changes after submitting your degree completion application, please email diplomas@liberty.edu to ensure that your diploma will be sent to the correct address.
Addresses in ASIST may not reflect the address used for diploma shipments.
What size is my diploma?
Undergraduate students will receive a landscape oriented diploma that is 8.5″ x 11″. Undergraduate diplomas are delivered in a cover.
Graduate students will receive a portrait oriented diploma that is 13″ x 17″. Graduate diplomas are delivered in a box.
All Certificate students will receive a landscape oriented diploma that is 8.5″ x 11″. Certificate diplomas are delivered in a cover. 
Diploma Reissue
Fill out the Diploma Reissue form to reorder.
Additional Questions
If you have any additional questions, please email diplomas@liberty.edu."
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/transferring-courses/","Liberty Online
Residential"
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/enrollment-verification/","Enrollment Verification
A student is considered enrolled when they are registered for a course and have attended the course and/or completed academic work for the course after its start date. For enrollment verification purposes, a student’s time status (Ex: full-time, part-time, etc.) does not change when the student withdraws from a course, unless the student has been withdrawn from all of their courses. When a student has withdrawn from all of their in-progress courses, this constitutes a ceasing of enrollment.
Liberty University does not charge additional fees for student identity verification.
Full-time Enrollment
Undergraduate: 12 credit hours
Graduate: 9 credit hours
Doctoral: 6 credit hours
Half-time Enrollment
Undergraduate/Graduate: 6 credit hours
Doctoral: 3 credit hours
Deferment Related Requests
Lender policy requires students to be enrolled at least half-time in order to qualify for deferment.
To lenders, the term “enrolled” refers to being actively involved in coursework. If you only take courses during one 8-week sub-term, your loans will be taken out of deferment as soon as those courses end. If you enroll for the spring B-term (first 8-weeks), your loans will remain in deferment from January to March, but will be taken out of deferment the day after your B-term courses end. If at all possible, try to register for courses during both the B and D sub-terms each semester. By doing so, you will ensure that your loans remain in deferment for the entire duration of a semester.
Liberty University utilizes the National Student Clearinghouse update to inform lenders of your enrollment. This process takes up to 6 weeks to fully update. If necessary, in order to expedite the verification process, you may request a verification letter to be sent to your lenders by clicking the link below, entitled “Student Enrollment Verification Form.” This will prompt you to log in using your liberty email address as the username. Fill out the online form and a verification letter will be processed for you within two business days.
Liberty University is unable to send verification of current enrollment to your lender until the add/drop period passes, but you may submit the request once you have registered for the upcoming term. Liberty University will hold the request and send the letter to your lender(s) after the add/drop period. For online students, letters will be sent the day after courses begin. For resident students, letters will be sent the Monday of the second week of courses.
Student Enrollment Verification form 
This form is an online form that cannot be downloaded. It must be filled out and submitted electronically.
(If you’re having trouble accessing the form, here are some suggestions)
Enrollment verification requests submitted prior to 30 days before semester/sub-term start dates will not be processed.
Insurance Related Requests
Students above age 18 are required to be enrolled full-time in order to remain on parent/guardian insurance plans. If you need a verification letter for insurance purposes, please submit a request via the request link below.
Student Enrollment Verification Form
This form is an online form that cannot be downloaded. It must be filled out and submitted electronically.
(If you’re having trouble accessing the form, here are some suggestions).
Enrollment verification requests submitted prior to 30 days before semester/sub-term start dates will not be processed.
Forms
If you have a verification or deferment form that must be filled out and signed by the Registrar, you may submit it to the Registrar’s Office in person or via mail, scan, email, or fax. Please provide the recipient’s address, fax number, or email address with your form(s).
Registrar’s Office
1971 University Boulevard
MSC Box 710177
Lynchburg, VA 24515
Fax: 434-582-2187
Email: ev@liberty.edu
Canadian Students
Please send the Program Information and Certificate of Eligibility (Canadian Student Loan Agreement) forms to the Registrar’s Office to verify the accuracy of your enrollment dates. Inaccurate enrollment dates can delay provincial aid by 6 to 8 weeks. If you have questions, please email ev@liberty.edu."
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/transcript-information/","Liberty Online
Residential"
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/academic-calendar/final-exam-schedule/","Final Exam Schedule
General Guidelines:
Faculty are expected to use the final exam schedule to determine their exam time, however, some exceptions are permitted: classes that are fewer than 3 credit hours and classes with non-standard exam timeslots which have made prior arrangements with the Registrar.
Students are expected to take their exam as scheduled. Any exceptions should be determined by the instructor on a case-by-case basis. Please consult your instructor if there is a discrepancy or question on an exam time.
Unforeseen Circumstances: This includes any event resulting in the delay or closure of the University. You should continue to monitor your Liberty webmail to ensure that you are up to date with any changes in schedule. Further information may be gained by reviewing the announcements page of your course or by emailing the professor of your course directly.
Final Exam Schedule – Fall 2023
Instructors will provide the most up-to-date information about how the final exam will be administered. Please regularly check your Liberty University email for any updates throughout the semester.
	
Thursday, December 7th	Friday,
December 8th	Monday,
December 11th	Tuesday,
December 12th	
MWF, MW, or WF
8:15 a.m.			8:00 a.m.-10:00 a.m.		
TR
8:15 a.m.	1:00 p.m.-3:00 p.m.				
MWF, MW, or WF
9:20 a.m.	8:00 a.m.-10:00 a.m.				
TR
9:45 a.m.		1:00 p.m.-3:00 p.m.			
MWF, MW, or WF
12:00 p.m.	10:30 a.m.-12:30 p.m.				
TR
11:15 a.m.			10:30 a.m.-12:30 p.m.		
MWF, MW, or WF
1:05 p.m.		10:30 a.m.-12:30 p.m.			
TR
12:45 p.m.		8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.			
MWF, MW, or WF
2:10 p.m.			1:00 p.m.-3:00 p.m.		
TR
2:15 p.m.		3:30 p.m – 5:30 p.m.			
MWF, MW, or WF
3:15 p.m.				8:00 a.m.-10:00 a.m.	
TR
3:45 p.m.			3:30 p.m. -5:30 p.m.		
MWF, MW, or WF
4:20 p.m.	3:30 p.m.-5:30 p.m.				
M only 5:30, 6:00, or 6:30 p.m.			6:00 p.m.-8:00 p.m.		
W only 5:30, 6:00, or 6:30 p.m.		6:00 p.m.-8:00 p.m.			
T only 5:30, 6:00, or 6:30 p.m.	6:00 p.m. – 8:00 p.m.				
R only 5:30, 6:00, or 6:30 p.m.				10:30 a.m.-12:30 p.m."
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/waitlist-information-and-procedures/","Waitlist Information and Procedures
Important Reminders About the Waitlist
The waitlist allows students to wait for an open seat in a course. Once a seat becomes available in the course the first student on the waitlist will be given the chance to register. If the student does not register within the 24-hour time frame, the seat will then be made available to the next student on the waitlist. Not all courses will have a waitlist available.
Stay Up to Date 
View your current waitlist position directly from the myLU portal.
Open the Academics set item and view your waitlist
Use the Registration Tool
Be Prepared 
Make sure that there is nothing that could keep you from registering for the class once a spot becomes available. Make sure that you have met all of the prerequisite requirements and that there are no holds on your account. Check your email regularly. If you miss the notification and do not enroll within the 24 hour period, the seat will be made available to the next person on the waitlist.
How to Register 
Once you are eligible to register, you will receive an email to your Liberty University webmail account indicating that you have a 24 hour period to register for the course.
Please note that the waitlist will be cleared during add/drop week. During this time you may reach out to your professor directly for approval to be added to the class."
"https://www.liberty.edu/registrar/academic-policies-and-catalogs/","Liberty Online
Residential"
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/books-articles-more/","The Jerry Falwell Library has an extensive collection of resources in a variety of formats including:
Books
E-books
Articles (journals, newspapers, and magazines)
Databases
Dissertations & Theses
Audiovisual materials (DVDs, CDs, and streaming audio and video)
Music scores (Print and digital)
Beyond Books (e.g., tools, cookware, games, hammocks, exercise equipment, etc.)
Discover titles from any collections or format type through our advanced search tool.
Advanced Search
For checkout limits and lengths, visit the Borrowing Services Policy or the Beyond Books Borrowing Policy. 
Locations for Physical Collections
Main Collection
Most of the physical resources are stored in the temperature and humidity-controlled Automated Storage and Retrieval System (ASRS), but the newest and most frequently-used items are shelved in the Book Tower and Caudell Reading Room. The graphic to the right is displayed throughout the library to help you locate your desired materials. You can click on the image to open it in a new window.
New Books
A selection of the newest books is housed in the Carter Learning Commons on the first floor.
DVDs and CDs
Our DVD selection includes popular movies, documentaries, and instructional materials while the CDs include musical and other performance content as well as audiobooks. Cases for each item are shelved in the Carter Learning Commons on the first floor. Customers should take the case to the Customer Service Center for check out.
Beyond Books Collection
We offer items that are outside of what may be considered “traditional” library materials. These items are designed to meet a variety of student needs and interests. They include items such as umbrellas, games, sports equipment, and camping gear. Items can be browsed at the Beyond Books display kiosk next to the Customer Service Center. Cases for each item are shelved in the Carter Learning Commons on the first floor. Customers can take the case to the Customer Service Center for check out.
PreK-12 Teaching Resources and Juvenile Literature
The Curriculum Library located on the terrace level of the library houses PreK-12 teacher edition textbooks and teaching resources, English as a Second Language (ESL) materials, and children’s and young adult literature and magazines.
Magazines, Journals, and Newspapers
Recent issues of popular magazines, journals, and newspapers can be found in the Carter Learning Commons and the Upper Esbenshade Atrium on the first floor. Additional print journals are housed on browsable shelves in the Caudell Reading Room on the second floor or in the ASRS. You can request items stored in the ASRS through the library catalog by selecting the item’s entry and submitting a request. You can then retrieve your item from the Customer Service Center.
Archival Materials and Other Special Collections
Archival materials and other special collections are available through our Archives & Special Collections Department which is located on the terrace level. Physical archival materials cannot be checked out, but they can be used on-site in the Archives Reading Room.
If we do not have the materials you need, you can submit an Interlibrary Loan request, suggest an item for purchase, or explore other options. Please contact us if you need assistance in locating materials or placing requests."
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/jerry-falwell-museum/","The Jerry Falwell Museum is currently closed while it is in the process of relocating. 
More details will be coming soon!
The Man Behind the Vision
Jerry Falwell Sr. was a beloved pastor, author, political activist, evangelical leader, family man, and the founder of Liberty University. He was a man whose faith in God fueled a vision that continues to be realized in extraordinary ways.
Since opening on Falwell Sr.’s 70th birthday in 2003, the Jerry Falwell Museum has continued to grow its collection. It contains memorabilia about Liberty’s founder with donations from family, alumni, and friends from around the world. Those interested in the history of Liberty University, Thomas Road Baptist Church, Jerry Falwell Sr. ministries, and Baptist traditions in general may also wish to explore the Archives and Special Collections. 
From the Desk of Jerry Falwell Sr.
The museum also houses a library of Falwell Sr.’s writings, including books and personal letters.
Jerry Falwell Sr. leads a groundbreaking
ceremony on Liberty Mountain in March 1977.
“Faith is believing what God says in spite of circumstances. Faith is simply taking God at His Word.”
– Jerry Falwell Sr.
“Prayer Meeting in the Snow”
on January 21, 1977
Experience the Collection of a Lifetime
At the Jerry Falwell Museum, visitors can experience the life of one of the most significant Christian leaders of the 20th century.
Come and learn about the incredible life and legacy of Jerry Falwell Sr.
For more information, contact the museum at JerryFalwellMuseum@Liberty.edu or (434) 582-7578. You can also visit the museum’s Facebook page."
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/archives/","The Archives & Special Collections department preserves historical materials of Liberty University and related entities such as:
Affiliated Organizations—Liberty Christian Academy, Chaplains Museum, and Liberty Baptist Theological Seminary
Falwell Family Papers—Materials by or about the family of Liberty’s founder, Jerry Falwell Sr.
Falwell Ministries—Old Time Gospel Hour, Liberty Godparent Home, and Elim Home
Liberty University Oral Histories—Accounts of the founding and history of the university as told by alumni, faculty, administrators, and others
Liberty University School Newspaper—University newspapers published by faculty and students
Thomas Road Baptist Church—Church founded by Jerry Falwell Sr. and led by his son Jonathan Falwell
This department also preserves other primary source materials that support the university’s mission or that are of enduring value as outlined in the Special Collections Policy. These include, but are not limited to the following:
Archives & Special Collections Digital Books—Digitized print books from the Archives & Special Collections
Christian Fiction—Cross-section of the genre for study
Conservative Caucus—Records of the organization and its founder, Howard Phillips
Hymnal Collection—Core collection of Christian hymnals, music instruction, and general historic music scores
The James and Shelley Lutzweiler Hymnal Collection—Core collection of Christian hymnals, music instruction, and general historic music scores
Military Oral Histories—Accounts by military personnel, including World War II veterans and civilians who worked with the armed services
Miscellaneous Materials—Materials of historical value that do not readily fit into another main collecting category
Moral Majority—Materials generated by the organization founded by Jerry Falwell Sr. and others
New London Collection—Materials related to the historic town of New London, Virginia
Personal Papers—Personal papers of historically significant individuals who have donated materials to the archives
Rowlette Civil War Book Collection—Materials covering the topics of religion during the mid-nineteenth century in the United States
Sunday School Collection—Materials related to the history of the Sunday school movement
Sunday-School Times—Weekly newspaper from 1859-1966
Access to Materials
The Digital Collections platform provides access to digitized archival materials and to Collection Guides that detail the scope and nature of physical items. Physical items can be accessed in the Archives on the Terrace Level of the Jerry Falwell Library during the Archives’ hours of operation. Upon request, physical items can be reviewed for possible digitization to provide online access.
The Archives Policy governs access to all materials in this department.
Donations
Visit the donations page for details on materials of interest to the Archives & Special Collections as well as other ways that you can support the Jerry Falwell Library.
Other Special Collections
In addition to the materials in the Archives & Special Collections department, the Jerry Falwell Library maintains several other unique or specialized collections.
Curriculum Library—PreK-12 instructional resources and juvenile literature
Jerry Falwell Museum—Museum dedicated to the life and ministry of Liberty’s founder, Jerry Falwell Sr.
Scholars Crossing—Digital collection of scholarship produced by students and faculty of the University, including dissertations and theses
Contact Information
You can visit the Archives & Special Collections on the Terrace Level of the Jerry Falwell Library during the Archives’ hours of operation. You can also email archives@liberty.edu or call (434) 592-6230 with any questions related to the Archives & Special Collections."
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/students/","Contact Us
Get research support in person or by calling, texting, emailing, chatting, or scheduling an appointment any time that the library is open.
Interlibrary Loan
Borrow materials from other libraries or request that physical materials from our collections be delivered to you.
Additional Resources
Academic Success Center"
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/interlibrary-loan/","Services
Interlibrary Loan (ILL) enables current students, faculty, and staff to request materials. These requests may include:
Delivery of materials from our collections, including articles from our print journals
Books (excluding textbooks), audiovisual materials, and articles not owned by our library (Please note that some items may be difficult or impossible to borrow from other libraries; these include reference materials, rare or archival materials, theses or dissertations, audiovisual materials, and new or popular titles.)
Items from the Center for Research Libraries
Please note that there are restrictions on which services are available based on the type of customer. For additional information regarding policies and procedures, please click on the appropriate link below.
Residential students and staff (As well as online students, faculty, and staff who live close to campus)
Residential faculty
Online students, faculty, and staff
All students, faculty, and staff can also borrow materials directly from libraries that participate in our reciprocal borrowing programs. 
Questions? Contact the Interlibrary Loan Office at 434-582-2442 or illoan@liberty.edu."
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/curriculum/","The Jerry Falwell Library has an extensive curriculum collection, which is housed in the Curriculum Library on the terrace level. These materials support the School of Education by providing access to a variety of PreK-12 instructional resources and juvenile literature including:
Teacher edition textbooks
Teaching materials
Educational games, manipulatives, and models
Children’s and young adult fiction and nonfiction
Visit our Curriculum Library Guide for more information on Curriculum Library materials. Materials on educational theory and research can be found in the main collection of the library. Visit the Education Research Guide to learn more about those resources.
Collections
Books in the Curriculum collection can be searched in the Library Catalog.
Literature
Easy/Everybody (E) – Fictional picture books for all ages, plus board books, pop-up books, alphabet books, and counting books
Children’s Fiction (FIC) – Independent reading fiction titles for children in grades 1-6, including classics, award winners, Christian fiction, and contemporary titles
Young Adult Fiction (YA) – Fiction titles for grades 7+, including Classics, award winners, Christian fiction, and contemporary titles
Children/Young Adult Biography (B) – Individual and family biographies for children and young adults of all ages
Children/Young Adult Nonfiction (Dewey) – Bible stories and books about history, science, art, sports, language, mathematics, and technology written in vocabulary that children can understand
Educational/Children’s Periodicals
Educational Journals – Variety of titles available online with hard copy housed in the main library
Children’s Magazines – Several titles in paper format housed in the Curriculum Library
Textbooks & Teaching Resources
Materials include a wide variety of secular and Christian teaching methods and publishers.
PreK-12 Textbooks (CUR) – Teacher edition textbooks and supplemental materials such as workbooks and transparencies
Teacher Resource Materials (TRM) – Lesson and activity idea books that are not specific to a particular textbook, including big books, posters, games, and manipulatives for many subject areas
English-Second Language (ESL) – Materials that assist international students with English language acquisition and help prepare teachers who will work with ESL students
Standardized Tests – A wide variety of testing materials designed to measure aptitude, achievement, and learning styles"
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/faculty/","The Jerry Falwell Library is here to support learning, discovery, and research by providing you and your students with robust resources, engaging instruction, flexible spaces, and outstanding services.
Library Services
Course Reserves (Residential)–Place items in the library for students to check out for three hours, one day, or three days.
Interlibrary Loan–Borrow materials from other libraries or request that materials from our collections be delivered to you.
Liaison Librarians–Contact your department’s designated librarian for library instruction, collection development, curriculum support, and research assistance needs.
Library Technologies–Use the library’s telepresence or assistive technologies.
Research & Instruction–Request residential classroom instruction, synchronous or asynchronous online sessions, video tutorials, and other instructional materials.
Room Requests–Book a group study room for academic purposes or request to use an event space.
Scholarly Communications–Get copyright assistance, and explore publishing and Open Education Resources (OER) information.
Faculty Scholarship
RefWorks–Organize your research, and easily generate reference lists.
Scholars Crossing–Submit your works to our institutional repository, and explore Liberty University journals, conferences, and events.
Library Materials
Recommend Resources–Submit requests for items to be added to our collection.
Additional Resources
Academic Success Center–Direct students to tutoring, writing, and study skills support.
Beyond Our Library–Visit participating libraries in person to borrow physical items from their collections.
Center for Research Libraries (CRL)–Use CRL’s digital collections or request print resources through ILLiad.
WorldCat–Discover if a book is available in a library near you.
For library information and updates, check out the latest edition of the JFL Insider: A Newsletter to Keep You in the Know, and follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram! Previous editions of the JFL Insider are archived in Scholars Crossing."
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/alumni/","Liberty University Alumni can use their Liberty University Alumni Card along with a photo ID to check out library materials and their Liberty University login credentials to access the online resources noted. These resources are for personal, non-commercial use; use for commercial gain is not permitted.
Popular Databases
Academic Search (Alumni Edition)—Full-text journal articles in social sciences, humanities, multicultural studies, education, and more.
Atla Serials, Religion Collection—Full-text journal articles, book reviews, and collections of essays across all fields of religion and theology including Biblical studies, world religions, church history, and religious perspectives on social issues from 1949 to the present
Business Source (Alumni Edition)—Full-text, peer-reviewed scholarly articles covering management, economics, finance, accounting, international business, and more (Updated daily)
ProQuest Central (Alumni Edition)—Full-text scholarly journals, trade and professional publications, newspapers, magazines, dissertations, working papers, and case studies covering education, psychology, and religion Video Tutorial
ProQuest Central includes content from:
Education Database—Full-text articles, dissertations, and other relevant sources in the field of education
Psychology Database—Abstracts and indexing of articles, including some full-text, covering behavioral, clinical, cognitive, developmental, experimental, industrial, and social psychology, along with personality, psychobiology, and psychometrics
Religion Database—Scholarly journals and other publications primarily in full-text, covering diverse religious and spiritual studies including formal theology as well as commentary on topics of general interest from the perspectives of many worldwide religions"
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/community/","Community Membership
Community members can obtain a library card for a $10 annual fee payable by credit or debit card.
This card allows you to check out materials from the library’s physical collections in accordance with the Borrowing Services Policy.
To inquire about your library account or the status of items you have checked out, please contact us.
Computers and Printers
Visit the IT Help Desk within the Dodak Technology Commons of the Jerry Falwell Library to request a visitor access code for the computers or for assistance with printing."
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/about/","Mission
The Jerry Falwell Library promotes learning, discovery, and research by providing robust resources, engaging instruction, flexible spaces, and outstanding services to the Liberty University community.
Vision
The Jerry Falwell Library will be the center of academic life at Liberty, cultivate an ethos of Christian service to one another, and equip all champions for Christ to be informed, articulate world-changers.
Core Values
Faith – We seek to grow into the likeness of Jesus Christ.
Service – We display love, respect, and humility as we support others.
Wisdom – We promote learning, growth, and creativity framed within biblical truth.
Integrity – We practice honest, responsible stewardship of God’s gifts.
Community – We value and encourage building relationships, both personal and professional.
Strategic Directions
Responsive Solutions: Meet customers at their point of need and provide equitable access to relevant resources, services, and spaces
Visible Presence: Develop and execute compelling communication strategies that market the JFL’s unique role within the community
Elevated Scholarship: Advance the quality and prominence of Liberty scholarship through research instruction and access initiatives
Impactful Venues: Facilitate physical and virtual learning, research, and work environments to optimize stakeholder experiences
Strategic Collaborations: Develop relationships with key stakeholders to address changing needs and conditions
Supportive Culture: Foster an environment of trust and mutual respect that equips and empowers employees to contribute to organizational goals in ways that are personally and professionally fulfilling
Operational Efficiency: Develop and implement internal processes that yield quality, contain costs, and demonstrate compliance
Collections*
3,110,251 electronic and physical items 
2,682,928 e-books, video and audio streams, digital scores, etc.
427,323 books, DVDs, CDs, scores, models, and non-traditional items (e.g., tools, cookware, games, hammocks, exercise equipment, etc.)
247,099 unique journal titles
407 multidisciplinary and specialized databases
Facility*
Featuring Jeffersonian-style architecture, the building was recognized with Library Journal’s Landmark Libraries 2016 Honorable Mention Award for innovative design and spaces.
170,000+ square feet
2,471 seats
200+ lockers
116 computers
100+ weekly service hours (fall & spring academic terms)
34 group study rooms
11 print stations
3 levels of quiet (Deep Quiet, Quiet, & Collaborative)
Memberships
The Jerry Falwell Library maintains membership in the following organizations:
Atla
Center for Research Libraries
Christian Library Consortium
Ex Libris Users of North America (ELUNA)
HathiTrust
Lyrasis
Virginia Independent College and University Library Association
Virginia Library Association
Virtual Library of Virginia
*Statistics are accurate as of June 30, 2023."
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/donations/","Named for Liberty University’s founder Jerry Falwell Sr., the Jerry Falwell Library opened in January 2014 and serves all Liberty University students, faculty, and staff as well as the surrounding community. There are several opportunities to support the mission of the Jerry Falwell Library.
Naming Opportunities
One way that you can support the library is by investing in one of the remaining opportunities to have a space in the Jerry Falwell Library named in your honor or in honor or memory of someone you designate.
Library General Fund
Donating to the Jerry Falwell Library general fund is a great way to help the library pursue new initiatives to better support academics at Liberty.
Historical Donations
We are eagerly seeking donations of relevant materials for the Archives and Special Collections and the Jerry Falwell Museum. We are interested in a wide variety of materials with an emphasis on items related to the university, Jerry Falwell Sr., and his ministries.
Jerry Falwell Sr. and the Falwell Family
Liberty University (e.g., academics, events, sports, etc.)
Thomas Road Baptist Church
Liberty Christian Academy
Moral Majority
Old-Time Gospel Hour
Falwell Ministries (e.g., Liberty Godparent Home, Hope Aglow, etc.)
We collect many different types of materials including printed items and memorabilia.
Booklets
Brochures
T-Shirts
Posters
Scrapbooks
Memorabilia
In particular, we are currently seeking Selah Yearbooks from these years:
1974
1977
1979
1998
2002-2020
If you have items to donate, please email archives@liberty.edu or call 434-592-6230 prior to sending items so that we can determine how to best direct your donation. Additionally, we request that you complete a donation form so that we can provide you with an acknowledgment of your donation and instructions on the best way to send the materials to us.
Book Donations
Books and other physical materials are gratefully accepted by the library with the following frameworks:
No conditions may be attached to their disposition and only those materials which prove to be in good physical condition and which conform to the collection goals, guidelines, and policies are added to the collection.
The Collection Management Department acknowledges all donations. However, the appraisal of gifts for tax purposes is the responsibility of the donor. In general, the library conforms to the “Statement of Appraisal of Gifts” developed by the Association of College and Research Libraries.
Book donors are asked to complete a release form."
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/contactus/","To reserve a group study room, visit an information desk; call, email, or chat with a research consultant; or click the button below.
Reserve Online"
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/events/","Monday, September 04, 2023, 5-6 p.m. 
Instrumental Inspirations Concert 
Silas Blair | Piano
Thursday, September 14, 2023, 5-7 p.m. 
Game Night at the Library 
Play games and enjoy snacks at Game Night at the Library. Choose from select board games, card games, and puzzles. Plus, you can check out even more games from the library’s Beyond Books collection! There will be snacks and a chance to win a $25 Amazon gift card, so don’t miss out on the fun!
Thursday, September 21, 2023, 12:30-3:30 p.m. 
Pop-Up Library 
Stop by JFL’s Pop-Up Library in the Montview Student Union to check out items from our collections, including items in the Beyond Book Collection (aka “The Collection of Stuff You’re Too Broke to Own!”) Plus, you can chat with library staff members to learn more about how the library is here to support you!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/site-search","Skip to Main NavigationSkip to Main Content
Education
Liberty University
Residential
Liberty University Online
School of Divinity
School of Law
Osteopathic Medicine
Resident Undergrad Admissions
Liberty Online Academy
Resident Graduate Admissions
Liberty Christian Academy
Willmington School of the Bible
Military Affairs
Athletics
Athletics
Liberty Flames
Flames Football
Flames Basketball - Men
Flames Basketball - Women
Club Sports
Campus Recreation
Intramural Sports
Events
College For A Weekend
Commencement
Concerts
Homecoming
Online Student Life
Scaremare
Alumni
Parents
Visit Us
Media
Liberty Journal
Liberty News
The Journey FM
90.9 The Light
Liberty Champion
Selah Yearbook
Streaming Media
Campus Maps
LUVotes
Request Info
Apply Now
Visit Us
Create Guest Account
Sign In
magnifying_glass_icon 
magnifying_glass_icon 
Resources 
Books, Articles, & More
Curriculum Library
Archives & Special Collections
Jerry Falwell Museum
Scholars Crossing
Research Guides
Services 
Student Support
Faculty Support
Interlibrary Loan
Alumni
Community
General Info 
About
Hours
Events
Donations
Contact Us
Chat 
magnifying_glass_icon 
Home
Site Search
Site Search
Related Pages
General Information
Hours
Library Policies
Suggestions & Feedback
Ways to Connect
Contact Us
Jerry Falwell Library
(434) 582-2220
research@liberty.edu
Additional Navigation
Related Pages
General Information
Hours
Library Policies
Suggestions & Feedback
Ways to Connect
Contact Us
Jerry Falwell Library
(434) 582-2220
research@liberty.edu"
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/search-tips/","When researching in many of the Jerry Falwell Library databases, the default is to search across many fields automatically. Typically fields being searched include the title, author(s), volume, subject terms, and/or ISBN as well as in the text of an article or e-book. Using the advanced search options in a database will allow you to specify one of those areas in order to focus your search and locate more specific results.
Search Queries
The databases are not designed to search like Google for a natural language question such as:
What was the 2014 GDP of Chile?
Instead, the databases instead rely on the use of keywords. A good search for the question above would be:
Chile AND GDP AND 2014
Note the capitalization of the word AND in the sample search above. Please see the Boolean Logic section below for more details on the use and capitalization of the words AND, OR, and NOT to narrow or broaden your search.
“Quotation Marks”
Placing quotation marks around your search phrase is helpful because doing so will limit results to only items that contain those words in that exact order. This will increase the accuracy of your returned results.
For example, a search for the phrase Adult Learning will return very different results with and without quotation marks:
Adult Learning search results: 457,965
“Adult Learning” search results: 21,156
In the example of “Adult Learning”, the results are approximately 95% more relevant than searching without quotation marks. This is because if quotation marks are not used, the database will search for the word Adult or the word Learning, and results will include resources that mention both or either word, regardless of the order in which they appear or their relationship to one another.
Boolean Operators: AND, OR, NOT
Database search fields recognize AND, OR, and NOT as Boolean operations when they are typed in ALL CAPS in the search box.
Using AND allows terms to be linked together to narrow and focus your search. For example, if you are trying to locate sources on technology used in the elementary classroom, you could perform one of these searches to focus your results:
technology AND “elementary education”
technology AND “elementary school”
technology AND “elementary school” AND impact
Using OR expands your search and is useful when there is more than one commonly used term or phrase for your topic. For example, you could search:
“local food” OR “sustainable eating”
To exclude items in search, you can use the NOT operator to focus your search. For example, you might want to search:
animal NOT dog
birds NOT penguins
As shown in the examples above, you can use quotation marks for exact phrases that are part of your Boolean search.
Wildcards
Searches using the search “all” option can be performed using the wildcards ? and *. (Wildcards cannot be used as the first character of a search.)
The question mark (?) will match any one character.
Example: “Ols?n” will return results for “Olsen” or “Olson”
The asterisk (*) will match zero or more characters within a word or at the end of a word.
Example: “Cha*r” would match “Chapter”, “Chair”, and “Char”
Example: “Temp*” will match “Temptation”, “Temple”, and “Temporary”
Developing search strategies is necessary to successfully locate the best results for your research. The Research and Instruction Department has created a short video series that provides an introduction to the best practices for searching the library databases."
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/hours/","Sunday
September 3 Monday
September 4 Tuesday
September 5 Wednesday
September 6 Thursday
September 7 Friday
September 8 Saturday
September 9 
Jerry Falwell Library 1:00 p.m. - 11:45 p.m.	7:30 a.m. - 11:45 p.m.	7:30 a.m. - 11:45 p.m.	7:30 a.m. - 11:45 p.m.	7:30 a.m. - 11:45 p.m.	7:30 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.	9:30 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.	
Curriculum Library 1:00 p.m. - 10:00 p.m.	7:30 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.	7:30 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.	7:30 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.	7:30 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.	7:30 a.m. - 8:00 p.m.	9:30 a.m. - 8:00 p.m.	
Archives and 
Special Collections CLOSED	10:00 a.m. - 8:00 p.m.	10:00 a.m. - 8:00 p.m.	11:30 a.m. - 8:00 p.m.	10:00 a.m. - 8:00 p.m.	11:30 a.m. - 6:00 p.m.	9:30 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.	
*The Jerry Falwell Library is closed for Convocation from 10:15 a.m. – 11:30 a.m.
Related Locations"
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/library-accounts/","Jerry Falwell Library Account
Use your Liberty Flames card to view checkouts, renew materials, or request items from the robot or library shelves when you log into your library account. (Community members will need to contact borrowing services at (434) 592-3346 or borrowingservices@liberty.edu for account inquiries.)
Other Library-Related Accounts
In addition to your Jerry Falwell Library account, current students, faculty, and staff can create several other accounts that they may find beneficial.
ILLiad–Create and log into your account to request materials from other libraries through Interlibrary Loan (local students, faculty, and staff), request that items from our collections be delivered to you (faculty and distance students), and retrieve electronically-delivered items.
RefWorks–Use this tool to manage your citations across databases, generate reference lists/bibliographies, and more.
Database Accounts
While you do not need to create an account to use any of our databases, many of them (e.g., EBSCO, ProQuest, JSTOR, Science Direct, etc.) allow you to create an account, which enables you to save searches, create alerts, and/or download content. If you have any questions or need assistance, please contact us."
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/events/game-night-at-the-library-2/","Play games and enjoy snacks at Game Night at the Library. Choose from select board games, card games, and puzzles. Plus, you can check out even more games from the library’s Beyond Books collection! There will be snacks and a chance to win a $25 Amazon gift card, so don’t miss out on the fun!
09/14/2023 - 5-7 p.m.
Location: Active Learning Classroom
Add to Calendar"
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/events/pop-up-library/","Stop by JFL’s Pop-Up Library in the Montview Student Union to check out items from our collections, including items in the Beyond Book Collection (aka “The Collection of Stuff You’re Too Broke to Own!”) Plus, you can chat with library staff members to learn more about how the library is here to support you! 
09/21/2023 - 12:30-3:30 p.m.
Location: Montview Student Union"
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/events/instrumental-inspirations-concert-2/","Dr. Michael Brennan & the Liberty University Guitar Ensemble
10/05/2023 - 5-6 p.m.
Location: Lower Esbenshade Atrium"
"https://www.liberty.edu/library/directory/","Jerry Falwell Library Departments
Click on the appropriate department name for a listing of faculty and staff who can best assist you.
Other Liberty University Libraries"
"https://www.liberty.edu/giving/naming-opportunities/","Naming Opportunities
Naming Opportunities at Liberty University
Your named gift will help continue to train Champions for Christ at Liberty University for years to come.
From facilities to faculty support through endowed chairs and professorships, you can choose one of our many naming opportunities. Named gifts can be made in a wide variety of levels and give you the chance to place your name or the name of a loved one on a building, athletic facility, residence hall, classroom, faculty office, study area, and more.
Below is our growing list of naming opportunities on the campus. If you have a specific idea, call the Office of Development and speak to one of our major gift officers at (866) 602-7983.
Create a Lasting Legacy
Discover Liberty’s Naming Opportunities"
"https://www.liberty.edu/giving/staff/","Development Staff
Susan Barringer
Manager of Operations
Exec. Assist. to the
Sr. VP of Development
(866) 602-7983
development@liberty.edu
April Tolley
Director
Center of Donor Engagement
(800) 628-7972
dcc@liberty.edu"
"https://www.liberty.edu/giving/matching-gift-search/","Matching Gift Search
Support Liberty’s Legacy with a Matching Donation
Many employers sponsor matching gift programs and will match any charitable contributions or volunteer hours made by their employees. If your company is eligible, request a matching gift form from your employer, and send it completed and signed with your gift. We will do the rest.
The impact of your gift to Liberty University may be doubled or possibly tripled! Some companies match gifts made by retirees and/or spouses.
To find out if your company has a matching gift policy, enter your employer’s name below:"
"https://www.liberty.edu/giving/employee-giving/","Employee Giving
Since 1971, employee giving has been a tradition at Liberty University. Faculty and staff have always come together as family to support fellow employees as well as students. In this spirit, the Office of Development is excited to introduce the Employee Giving Campaign. Together we can make a difference and continue this proud tradition.
The Employee Giving Campaign is divided into four main categories of giving:
Athletics: Competing at the NCAA Division I level of play is an exciting opportunity for Liberty. Donating to athletics helps cover required costs for its 20 NCAA Division I and over 40 Club Sports teams.
Education: Providing a Christ-centered, liberal arts education to the student body is paramount to Liberty’s mission. Giving opportunities include the College of Arts & Sciences, the Jerry Falwell Library, and the Performing Arts Center Fund.
People: Staff and students are Liberty’s lifeblood, and you can make a difference in the lives of your co-workers who are experiencing unforeseen financial hardships.
Service: Training Champions for Christ is not limited to campus. Donating to the service category supports ministries that serve locally and internationally.
All employees are encouraged to give at a level with which they feel comfortable and to the fund that means most to them. Our goal is 100% participation, and to make giving easy for employees, the Office of Development has established a payroll deduction system.
It only takes a spark to light the Flame — every dollar you invest will change the lives of students and will carry on our mission of Training Champions for Christ.
Testimonials
David Corry
Esther Alcindor
Areas for Giving
How to Give
Getting started is easy. Simply sign up for payroll deduction, or make a one-time or recurring gift with your credit or debit card.
Sign up for Payroll Deduction
(Note: Adjunct Faculty and Student Workers are not eligible for Payroll Deduction)
Employee Giving Form
Employee Benevolence Fund
More details on the Employee Benevolence Fund
FAQ
View Frequently Asked Questions
If your department is not represented in the list of funds, please reach out to development@liberty.edu. 
Contact
Susan Barringer
sbarringer@liberty.edu
434-592-6112
Liberty University-Office of Development
1971 University Blvd.
Lynchburg, VA 24515"
"https://www.liberty.edu/engineering/about/giving/","Give to Engineering
General Fund
Your donation to the School of Engineering General Fund will support student programs, clubs, and competition teams.
Building Fund
Your donation to the School of Engineering Building Fund will support the future growth of our facilities and programs..
Creationeering Fund
Your donation to the School of Engineering Creationeering Fund will support students who are designing products for the good of mankind and the glory of God! Creationeering is seeing the Creator through the disciplines and integration of science, engineering, and entrepreneurship.
Scholarship Fund
The School of Engineering Scholarship Fund provides financial aid to deserving engineering students, providing Christ-centered men and women with opportunities to pursue careers in engineering disciplines."
"https://www.liberty.edu/giving/donation-disclosure/","Donation Disclosure
California & Minnesota: 100 percent of your gift may be deducted under Federal and State income tax laws. The University’s audited financial statement is available upon request to the University.
Maryland: A copy of the University’s current financial statement is available on request to Liberty University, 1971 University Blvd., Lynchburg, VA 24515, (434) 582-2000. For the cost of copies and postage, documents and information submitted under the Maryland Solicitations Act are available from the Maryland Secretary of State.
Washington: Liberty University is registered with Washington State’s Charities Program as required by law; additional information is available by calling 800-332-4483 or 360-725-0378 or by visiting sos.wa.gov/charities."
"https://www.liberty.edu/giving/presidents-circle/","President’s Circle
Organizations
Over 50 years ago, Liberty University Founder, Dr. Jerry Falwell Sr. cast the vision God had given him to Train Champions for Christ. Today Liberty is a world-class university with graduates who impact the culture for Christ. This has been made possible because of generous contributors who are champions themselves.
Champions give of themselves and their resources and Liberty celebrates this partnership. The President’s Circle is a list recognizing those whose giving to Liberty University qualifies for one of the following categories.
If we have omitted, misspelled, or misplaced your name, please accept our apologies and notify our office by calling toll free (866) 602-7983.
2023 President’s Circle
(Gifts received through January 31st, 2023)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/giving/employee-giving/benevolence-fund/","Employee Benevolence Fund
“Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all, especially to those who are of the household of faith.” – Galatians 6:10
Mission
On behalf of the generous giving of Liberty University employees, the Employee Benevolence Fund Council is committed to an effort to provide emergency relief to eligible faculty and staff members of the University who are facing an unforeseen, emergency, financial hardship. This fund is known as the LU Employee Benevolence Fund.
Application Process
All requests for assistance from the LU Employee Benevolence Fund shall be made by submitting a “LU Employee Emergency Assistance Application” (“Application”) to the Chairman of the Committee. The Application should contain all information which will aid the Committee in evaluating the request. This could include medical bills, physician reports, fire or flood reports, documented loss of income due to death, illness, or accident. The completed form should be delivered to the Office of Development to the attention of Benevolence Fund Department.
All members of the Committee will keep requests to and disbursements from the Fund confidential to individuals outside of the Committee, except as required by other University policies and procedures or by law.
The Committee shall approve or deny requests based upon the eligibility criteria below, and provided that funds are available for distribution.
Decisions of the Committee are final. There is no appeal process.
The person requesting assistance will be notified of the decision by the Chairman or their delegate.
Upon approval of assistance, funds shall be requested from Accounting and in most cases, available within 10 working days, if not sooner.
Eligibility Criteria
The Committee will evaluate employee requests and render decisions regarding the disbursement of funds in accordance with the following criteria:
Requestor must be an employee of Liberty University in a full or part-time position. Temporary employees and student workers are not eligible.
Requestor must have been employed at Liberty University for at least one year immediately prior to the financial hardship identified in the Application. The one-year eligibility period will be waived if the financial hardship is caused by the death of requestor’s immediate family member, provided requestor satisfies all other eligibility criteria. For purposes of determining eligibility, “immediate family” means the requestor’s spouse, parents, and children (including adopted or stepchildren).
Requestor’s need for financial assistance must come from emergency, unforeseen circumstances beyond the employee’s control. This would not include living beyond one’s means. This undue, financial hardship may be the result of fire, theft, natural disasters such as flood, hurricane, or loss of essential property or primary residence due to circumstances beyond
requestor’s (or requestor’s family’s) control. Also included would be death, disability, accidents, or illnesses within the requestor’s immediate family.
Expenses that would not be included for consideration would be: poor financial planning, divorce, non-essential items such as cell phone, cable, credit card payments, expenses related to car repairs, general dentistry, bail, garnishments, judgments, child care, debt repayment or consolidation, litigation, medical needs for which insurance or a charity hospital is available.
Employees may submit only one Application within an 18-month period. No more than 3 Applications may be submitted within the employee’s total term of employment.
A Committee member may not participate in consideration of an Application for an award to the Committee member’s family.
Award Limits
All decisions of the Committee are final. The Committee will review requests within 3 working days of receipt of Application. Due to fund availability, it may not always be possible to approve all qualifying requests. The amount awarded to all applicants cannot exceed the available balance of the Benevolence Fund. Should the funds available not be sufficient to meet the current needs, the Fund Office will Communicate the need via email to departments within the University.
Contributions To The Fund
Employees and non-employees may make designated contributions to Liberty University for the Employee Benevolence Fund online or by check, cash or payroll deductions (for employees). Contributions made to this fund will be tax-deductible as a charitable donation. A year-end tax-deductible receipt will be sent to the donor in the first quarter of the following year. Tracking fund availability and awards will be the responsibility of the committee."
"https://www.liberty.edu/DonorRecognition/","Browse By Campaign
25th Anniversary
	
Arts, Schilling, Prayer Chapel Bricks
	
Bell List
	
Jerry Falwell Library
	
Mother's Honor Roll
	
Named Buildings
	
Theatre Seat Naming Project
	
Towns Lecture Hall
	
Supreme Courtroom Seat Naming
	
Founders Legacy Society"
"https://www.liberty.edu/campusrec/clubsports/?acode=C27223","Skip to main content
Scoreboard
Dance
vs Liberty University Homecoming
Dance
vs Brigham Young University
Dance
vs Virginia Tech
Dance
vs New Mexico State University
Dance
vs Coffeehouse
Dance
vs University of Virginia
Dance
vs Concordia University Irvine
Dance
vs Dance Clinic & Tryouts
Cycling
at Mountain Bike Race
Cycling
at Mountain Bike Race
Racquetball
vs Tryouts
Ski & Snowboard
vs Tryouts
Beach Volleyball
vs AVCA Men's Alliance Fall Event
Men's D3 Hockey
at Potomac Patriots
Beach Volleyball
vs AVCA Men's Alliance Fall Event
Cycling
at Appalachian State University
Triathlon
at Patriots Triathlon
Beach Volleyball
vs AVCA Men's Alliance Fall Event
Cycling
at Appalachian State University
Ski & Snowboard
vs Tryouts
Stories
Countdown
vs
Men's D1 Hockey
vsNorth Carolina State University
Liberty University Club Sports Videos
Slideshow Grid"
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/leadership/","IS Leadership
John Gauger
Chief Information Officer and Executive VP of Analytics
Chris Hara
Solutions Architect of Information Technology
Joshua Zealand
Vice President of Information Services & Analytics
Adam Wittcop
Vice President of Software Development & Engineering
Ivie Lilly
Director in Analytics & Decision Support - Operations
Joe Marshall
Director in Analytics & Decision Support - Enrollment
Matt Peele
Director in Analytics & Decision Support - Academics
Josh Roberts
Director of Broadcast Communications
Jason Rawlings
Director of IT Customer Support
Jeremiah Skinner
Director of IT Development
Kelly Mayhew
Director of IT Enterprise Architecture
Brian Wilkes
Director of IT Network Operations
Brian Johnson
Director of IT Security"
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/about/","Overview
Information Services (IS) exists to introduce and support technologies within the University community. Together, we identify issues, communicate solutions, and provide resources for both personal and professional success.
Structure
Information Services is composed of two divisions: 1) Information Services & Analytics and 2) Software Development & Engineering. Information Services & Analytics supports university academics, enrollment, and operations. Software Development & Engineering builds, deploys, and supports university technologies, services, applications, and broadcasts. To view a full listing of IS departments, please visit our Departments Page.
Vision & Strategy
The LUIS/CIO office supports the University’s Statement of Mission and Purpose by creating goals and objectives centered around Information Services related business outcomes, open communication, streamlined process, and user experience."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/departments/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/products/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services","Prev
IT Marketplace 
Our convenient online resource to help you get the technology that you need! 
SHOP NOW 
Next"
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/technology-councils/","Liberty University’s Information Services (IS) department supports all technology-related services, products, and projects. In order to better serve our customers, IS formed Liberty’s first technology council in the Fall of 2015 that focused on facilitating feedback on Liberty’s top services. Today, our Student Technology Council (STC) meets 4 times a semester to give innovative ideas and address any concerns.
Submit an STC Application
Technology Council’s Impact
STC has influenced many technology improvements across campus. Some of our top highlights include:
Real-time Bus Tracking on LU Today
Computer Lab Availability on LU Today
Laundry Availability Function on LU Today
Want to Join?
Do you have ideas about how to improve technology around campus? Then you can join our technology councils! Please submit a registration via email by filling out each provided section.
Top FAQs
Meeting Frequency: 3 times a semester
Invites: Before each meeting, all participants who registered for the councils will receive a meeting invite with the date, time, and location.
Resident Students are Welcome: No technical experience is required."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/policies/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/enterprise-architecture/it-contacts/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/products/faculty-and-staff/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/products/students-services/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/faculty-toolbox/","Enhance the student learning experience and collaborate with coworkers by utilizing top tier technology provided by Liberty University. The Faculty Toolbox organizes these technologies into categories that will help revolutionize how you present in the classroom and online.
Canvas LMS
Canvas is the university’s learning management system (LMS) that allows professors to create custom courses, utilize management tools, and see user analytics and statistics. Enhance the learning experience of students through intuitive learning and dynamic engaging content.
More Information
Video
Top Hat
Top Hat is an interactive teaching platform that is designed to engage and connect with students in and out of the classroom. Top Hat allows you to take attendance, present slides, and give quizzes and tests.
More Information
Kaltura Video
Kaltura allows you to record interactive presentations using your voice, webcam, and/or computer screen. You can then edit the recording and store it in Canvas making collaboration and analytics easy.
More Information
Videos
Adobe Express
Adobe Express makes it easy to create professional looking social graphics, web pages, and short videos that will help engage your audience. The Express web and mobile app help you give stunning presentations in the office or the classroom.
More Information
Video
Microsoft Sway
Microsoft Sway enhances any web-based presentation by creating visual presentations, reports, and more. Capture the attention of your audience by using interactive elements with Sway.
More Information
More Information – Video
Microsoft Teams
Microsoft Teams provides a hub for faculty, staff, and students to meet, chat, call, and collaborate all in one place. Stay organized and connected all while having access to other components of Microsoft 365 with Teams.
More Information
Dropbox Storage
Dropbox allows you to store files, recover deleted files, share files with coworkers or classmates, and access files while working or learning remotely. Keep important documents safe and easy to access with Dropbox.
More Information
Collaboration Hub
The Collaboration Hub provides information on collaborative tools that are available for all faculty, staff, and students. Learn about tools such as Kaltura, Dropbox, Webex, and Microsoft Teams to manage videos share files, and communicate with students or coworkers.
More Information
Adobe Lightroom
Adobe Lightroom gives you everything you need to create, edit, organize, store, and share your photos. Enhance colors, brighten photos, remove objects, and straighten shots with Lightroom.
Android Install
iOS Install
Video
Microsoft Lens
Microsoft Lens helps you capture important information such as notes from a meeting. It’s like having a scanner in your pocket! Take pictures of your meeting notes and convert them into a PDF, Word document, or PowerPoint file and save them to OneDrive. Access these files on the go and share them with your team.
Android Install
iOS Install
Tech Tips & More!
Tech Tips
Tech Tips provide simple tips and tricks to make using technology easier. Watch short videos that deliver snippets of information on a wide range of technology topics and products that can help you complete work easier and more efficiently.
More Information
Product Hub
For a comprehensive list of the products and services Liberty University provides to faculty and staff, visit the Products & Services Hub.
More Information"
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/products/is-tech-tips/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/it-security/","Liberty University is committed to protecting the integrity of our systems and services. In this connected world, maintaining the confidentiality of student, personnel, and operational data is everyone’s responsibility. The IT Security team works hard to protect the University and its computing users from both internal and external threats.
Here’s a way you can help out the IT Security team with the numerous threats we face. If you feel that something doesn’t seem right about an email you received or anything that seems off with one of our webpages, please use the Report Security Issue link to report the incident.
Report an Incident
Use the link below to report an incident through the IT HelpDesk.
Stay Alert on Phishing
At the top of the page, there’s a New Alert involving a phishing email. This is a way that we can keep you up-to-date on the newest phishing alerts for Liberty University. Click the link to read the details for the phishing attempt. For older phishing attempts, please visit www.liberty.edu/PhishingAlerts.
Check out these Topics!
The IS Policies page provides a wide variety of policies that will help keep you and your device safe from the threats you may face here at Liberty University. We’ve noted a few polices you may find helpful along with a few other topics below:
Liberty Password
Password Privacy
Multi-Factor Authentication
Ransomware
Protecting Your Tech
Phishing & Scam Tips
Flagging a Website
File Sharing"
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/it-security/phishing-alerts/","Information Technology wants to warn and educate the Liberty University community about the dangers of phishing attempts via email. A link for the most recent phishing attempt will appear on the IT Security homepage. Please refer to this helpful guide to keep yourself safe from a phishing attack.
The most recent phishing alerts are shown below. If you do not see an alert similar to what you are experiencing, please use the Report Security Issue link on this page to report a security issue.
Report an Incident
Use the link below to report an incident through the IT HelpDesk.
Title: Scholarship scam
Date: July 2023
Source: Reported by LU employee
Details: 
IT Security has become aware that users are receiving an email impersonating Liberty University informing them they have been awarded a scholarship and requesting the user to email “liberty.university@mail-on.us”. This is not a real scholarship award from Liberty University. If you receive this email or a similar email, please report it immediately. Do not reply to the email, open any attachments, or click any links.
Example: Click images to enlarge
Title: Work Study Scam
Date: July 2023
Source: Reported by an LU student
Details: 
IT Security has become aware that users are receiving emails offering a work study position with Dominique Martin. This is not a real job offer. If you receive this email or a similar email, please report it immediately. Do not reply to the email, open any attachments, or click any links.
Example: Click images to enlarge
Title: Canvas Fake Job Scam
Date: December 3, 2022
Source: Reported by LU Employees
Details: 
IT Security has become aware that some students have received a phishing email through Canvas prompting users to click on a link to view more information about a job opening. This is not a real offer. Please do not reply or click the link, and delete the message immediately.
Example: Click images to enlarge
Title: Writing Assistance Scam
Date: October 21, 2022
Source: Reported by LU Employees
Details: 
IT security was informed of a email phishing scam, offering writing assistance sent through notifications@instructure.com. This email claimed it would write papers for students and prompted users to respond with their personal email or WhatsApp number. Please do not ever open suspicious links or files that you are not expecting. Please do not reply to any emails from notifications@instructure.com, you may report all suspicious emails using the report button located in Outlook.
Example: Click images to enlarge
Title: Malicious Sharepoint Share
Date: August 31, 2022
Source: Reported by LU Employees
Details: 
IT security was informed of a email phishing scam, regarding a Sharepoint file that was sent through no-reply@sharepointonline.com. This file was claimed to be apart related to Accounts Payable, and is a survey prompting for the Users role in the university and their password. Please do not ever open suspicious links or files that you are not expecting, even if they are being sent through no-reply@sharepointonline.com. Report all suspicious emails to scams@liberty.edu or via the PhishER report button located in your Outlook App.
Example: Click images to enlarge
Title: Smishing (SMS Phishing)
Date: July 19, 2022
Source: Reported by LU Employees
Details: 
IT Security has been made aware of a new smishing scam to be on the lookout for. This scam purports to be from VPs of Liberty and requests the user to handle a request. However, this notice is not legitimate, and comes from the following phone number 720-358-7447, this number could change. Please disregard this text message and block the number if you receive it, do not respond. Do report the SMS message to IT Security at ITSecurity@liberty.edu with a screenshot of the text and phone number if possible.
Example: Click image to enlarge
Title: SharePoint Spoofing Phishing Scam
Date: June 17, 2022
Source: Legitimate External Users have been compromised
Details: 
IT Security has been made aware of a new email scam to be on the lookout for. This scam purports to be from SharePoint saying you have received a new document or FAX that contains sensitive information. However, this notice is not legitimate, and comes from a spoofed, or impersonated email address.
Example: Click images to enlarge
Title: PayPal Phishing Scam
Date: May 31, 2022
Source: Threat Intelligent Resources Reports
Details: 
IT Security has been made aware of a new email scam to be on the lookout for. This scam purports to be from PayPal and advises that your account has been restricted and you must take action to continuing using the service. However, this notice is not legitimate, and comes from a spoofed, or impersonated email address. The email has a link that would take you to a page on a non-PayPal domain but has many interface elements designed to look like a legitimate PayPal site. This site appears to log you in but asks many invasive questions for the purposes of committing identity theft; asking for things like residential and credit card information, as well as social security numbers.
Example: Click images to enlarge
Title: Covid Test Email
Date: December 8, 2021
Source: External Email
Details: 
There has been an influx in phishing campaigns that are targeting US universities. The attack begins with an email pretending to contain information about the new Omicron variant, COVID-19 test results, additional testing requirements, or educational program changes. These emails urge you to click on an attached .HTM file, which will take you to a cloned login page for the university’s login portal. DO NOT click or download the file and report the email immediately.
Example Email: 
Title: Internal Phish – Voicemail
Date: September 30, 2021
Source: Compromised Internal User
Details: 
There has been a recent uptick in lateral phishing attempts that are being sent internally from accounts that have been compromised accounts. The email informs users that they have a voicemail(s) waiting in their Microsoft Inbox.
Liberty University voicemail system does not send emails like these.
Example Emails: Click images to enlarge
Title: Payments Scam
Date: September 10, 2021
Source: Outlook Email
Details: 
There are reports of an email going around regarding attached payments that have been processed. Do not click the PDF attachments. They are links to a fraudulent login page.
Please report these emails when you receive them. Check out Protecting Yourself From Scams & Phishing for more information on how to report an email.
Title: Voice Message Scam
Date: September 9, 2021
Source: Outlook Voice Message
Details: 
There are reports where members of Liberty University are receiving emails with a link to a voice message. Do not click the link. It leads to a fraudulent login page asking for your username and password.
Please report these emails when you receive them. Check out Protecting Yourself From Scams & Phishing for more information on how to report an email.
Title: Loan Phone Scam
Date: May 27, 2021
Source: Scam Phone Calls
Details: 
There have been reports of students receiving phone calls from a group claiming to be Liberty University, stating they need financial aid information and LU account information in order to review the user’s loan(s) and ensure that the loan(s) or the loan deferment is processed correctly.
Helpful Tips: 
How To Avoid a Scam
3 Ways to Spot Student Loan Scams
Title: Notification of New Message
Date: May 29, 2021
Source: External Email – janita.pirhonen@aalto.fi
Details: 
The newest phishing email has a date that changes each time an email is sent out. The sender appears as “liberty Support” with a Liberty University recipient.
Example: Click images to enlarge
Title: SMS HR Phish
Date: March 19, 2021
Source: SMS(Text Message)
Details: 
A few have reported receiving a text message claiming to be HR with Liberty University and want to interview them. If you reply, you will be provided a phishing link. See the example text messages below.
Example: Click images to enlarge
Statement from HR:
HR communicates with employment candidates via their email address or a phone call to the number listed on their application submitted in HR Job Tools, but we do not send text messages. If someone suspects that a communication is not legitimate, they can contact HR@liberty.edu to confirm whether it was from HR or not.
Title: Shaun Staffen sent you some files
Date: January 25, 2021
Source: [External Email] Dropbox Email Address, no-reply@dropbox.com
Details: 
Dropbox transfer was used to users download “PO-09507 333.pdf” which when opened requests the user access the document through OneDrive by clicking on the link within the PDF Example/Content screenshot attached. IT Comms please block out individual user information.
This phishing attempted utilizes Dropbox to evade being blocked, when users open the dropbox link they are prompted to download the malicious PDF document.
Example: Click images to enlarge
Title: Quarantine Report Spoof
Date: December 22, 2020
Source: [External Email] Spoofing Individuals’ LU Email
Details: 
Scammers are using a spoof of the quarantine report to phish users into clicking a malicious link embedded in the email, stating:
You have new held messages.
Liberty has prevented the delivery of 9 new emails to your inbox because it identified these emails as spam.
View Emails
Example:
Title: Available, Urgent Request Email
Date: November 13, 2020
Source: [External Email] LU_Username.liberty.edu@gmail.com
Details: 
The scammer is sending emails with a Display name that matches users here at Liberty University, most of the time upper management. These emails are being sent to members of that person’s department, asking:
“What number can I text you at?”
Example:
Title: Deactivation Phishing Email
Date: October 20, 2020
Source: [External Email]
Details: 
IT Security is aware of a phishing email received by many Liberty University mailboxes and is working to mitigate it. This phishing email contains a very simple message:
“To all Liberty University Faculty, Staff and students: Your LU Email account information needs to be updated in the database system to avoid deactivation. Click [the phishing link] to update.”
Please remember that official Liberty University communications will not send this sort of message, and any alerts related to your LU email or login account status will be displayed in your browser or app at sign in.
Example:
Title: Missing/Pending Package Text Message
Date: August 25, 2020
Source: [Text Message/SMS]
Details: 
Recently, several members of the Liberty University community have reported receiving a text message advising of a lost or pending package and provides a link which is indicated to be used to claim the package. Please be aware that this message is not associated with Liberty University Postal Services, or any other postal or delivery service.
In the IT Security team’s investigation, it was determined that the link in the text would take the recipient to a variety of surveys that could be used to reveal personal information. While not precisely a phishing scam, it is a message that uses a sense of urgency mislead the recipient to access a potentially dangerous website.
Please note that if Liberty University Postal Services has received a package that is awaiting pickup, you will instead receive a notification email. If you receive this text message, or a similar message, please disregard it, and you may safely delete and or block the sender.
Example: 
Title: Malware Attacks with Email Attachments
Date: July 23, 2020
Source: [External Email]
Details: 
Help protect the Liberty University community and yourself from cyber threats by being vigilant when using email.
Cybercriminals will try to trick you into downloading a malicious attachment from an email. This will allow malware onto your device, causing serious damage to your data and files and stealing your account credentials and other sensitive information.
Recently, the Liberty University IT Security team has seen an increase in the amount of email threats using this method. While we believe that these attempts have been blocked, we feel it is important to equip our community to recognize these attempts in the event that one slips past our filters, or you encounter one in a personal, non-LU email account.
Common things to look out for:
Unexpected emails including an attachment, but the individual doesn’t say much about what the attachment is or why you are receiving it. For example, a blank email
Emails that have a sense of urgency, but they reference interactions (such as sales, orders, or invoices) that you haven’t had, or with organizations that you aren’t familiar with.
Emails with fake or “spoofed” sender addresses, where the email says it’s from one account, but it’s actually from another one.
Emails that have a subject line that is only your name as it appears in the email directory. For example: “Subject: [External] Lastname, Firstname Middlename (Department)”
Emails that have “[External]” in the subject line at the beginning. Just remember these emails did not come from Liberty University, even if it looks like it might have come from an LU email address.
If you believe you have received one of these emails or attachments, we recommend reporting it to Office 365. Please see the article, How can I stay safe against phishing and email scams , for further information.
Title: Impersonating Supervisors/Directors
Date: May 10, 2020
Source: [External Email]
Contents: 
Title: Fraudulent Email Warning: Bitcoin Sextortion
Date: April 22, 2020
Source: [External Email]
Details: 
Please be aware of a vicious phishing email message that is circulating with the attempt to extort money from recipients by using threats and shaming tactics. The messages are luring victims to send Bitcoin currency to the sender by threatening to release compromising photos or videos involving the recipient, known as sextortion.
In an attempt to increase the perceived legitimacy of the scam, they usually include a password that may have been associated with your account, but these often are collected from previous unrelated data breaches.
Examples of these messages are below: Click images to enlarge
If you receive a similar message, we recommend you take the following actions:
Do not send any money!
If you received this message and it contained a current password for your Liberty account, we recommend changing that passwords as soon as possible. Change your Liberty University password through How do I reset, change, or set up my Liberty password? or by calling the Help Desk at 866-447-2869.
Do not engage with the email sender & report the message through Office 365 so that the email can be investigated and help improve future detection How can I stay safe against phishing and email scams?.
If you have been a victim of a sextortion scam and have paid the Bitcoin ransom, immediately report it to the Liberty University Police Department (www.liberty.edu/police).
Title: [youremailaddress]@liberty.edu fails-to-deliver
Date: April 2, 2020
Source: I T helpdesk.<——–@columbus.k12.oh.us> (exact address removed for privacy reasons)
Details: Several emails were sent claiming to be from an “IT Service Desk” advising that several recent emails failed to be delivered. This email also included a PDF file that could potentially have malicious code in it.
Contents:
Title: “Package pending delivery” text scam
Date: April 1, 2020
Source: SMS Text Message
Details: A suspicious text message with a web link was received advising that the recipient had a package pending for delivery. After inspection of the site in the URL, it was determined that the site was hosting a fraudulent survey claiming to offer a free iPhone in return for information about your Liberty University experience.
Contents:
Title: FINAID STATUS ALERT
Date: February 21, 2020
Source: USER@miners.utep.edu
Contents:
Title: Payroll Notification
Date: February 21, 2020
Source: USER@ufl.edu
Contents:
Title: your libertyID suspended
Date: February 7, 2020
Source: ITfeedback [itfeedbacks@xidtechnology.apac.microsoftonline.com]
Contents:
Title: Quick Response
Date: January 10, 2020
Source: Gmail Account Disguised as LU Faculty Addresses
Contents:
Title: Sevice Update…
Date: December 18, 2019
Source: Liberty Support-Team (vcgte@cnhldn.com)
Contents:
Title: Help Desk
Date: November 19, 2019
Source: IT Help Desk
Contents:"
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/work-from-home-resources/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/support/remote-support/assistance-agreement/","HelpDesk Remote Assistance Agreement
Please read the agreement and click “I Accept” at the bottom of the page to continue.
In order to resolve certain computer issues, the Liberty University IT HelpDesk Remote Support technicians may request to remotely access a user’s computer. During a remote session, the IT HelpDesk technician may suggest installing or removing certain software or plug-ins to help resolve issues that may be occurring on the computer.
The Liberty University IT HelpDesk is undertaking the repair of the computer as a volunteer. Liberty University is not a bailee and shall have no liability as such. Specifically, neither Liberty University nor its employees, student assistants, agents, or contractors shall be liable to the user for any damages – whether direct, indirect, incidental, consequential, special, or punitive – to the computer or its components or peripherals. Also, Liberty University and its employees will not be liable for failure to repair, failure of repair, loss or corruption of data, loss of productivity, or losses occasioned by the computer affecting or rendering inoperable other devices to which it is connected.
The IT HelpDesk cannot be held liable for any hardware or software related issues that may incur during a remote support session. Agreeing to this policy means that you hereby give the IT HelpDesk technician permission to make changes on your computer. You are also giving them permission to access and control your computer from the remote location in order to troubleshoot and resolve the issue(s) at hand. This can include software installations, uninstallations, and/or configuration changes. They may also reset a browser and perform typical troubleshooting, which includes clearing the cache and cookies of your browser. All of these things will be done in order to get your computer to an optimum level of compatibility.
Due to the nature and limitations of remote support, the IT HelpDesk will not be able to fix all of the issues you may have encountered on your computer. If your computer cannot be fixed remotely, you should take it to a local technician to resolve the issue at hand."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/it-training-and-on-demand/","Welcome to IT Training & On-Demand!
We offer training classes on the technology related products and services used at Liberty University. These training classes are available to faculty and staff in a few different formats including on-demand, remote, and in-person.
Contact us today for more information on coordinating a remote or in-person training class for your department/group by email at ittraining@liberty.edu.
The On-Demand courses found here offer technology training at your pace; no need to sit in a classroom when you can do this at your convenience. Additionally, other training resources are provided below.
On-Demand Courses
On-Demand Resources"
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/support/it-inventory/","The goal of IT Inventory is to coordinate on-time delivery of hardware quotes, incoming IT products, and project supplies to faculty, staff, and departments. This is accomplished by cultivating solid relationships with every division within Liberty University so that all quote requests and placed orders are processed efficiently.

In addition, IT Inventory prides itself on its ability to offer surplus computer products to meet the needs of students, individuals, and those in the outside community.
Services
IT Marketplace
Surplus Computers"
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/support/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/it-marketplace/","Prev
Next
Welcome to the IT Marketplace!
Liberty University offers a convenient online resource to help you get the technology that you need for your education: The IT Marketplace!
If you have any questions as you shop Apple devices, please call us at (434) 582-2316 or send us an e-mail to sm330@bncollege.com and one of our sales representatives will be happy to help you. For minimum computer requirements to reference while you shop, review our current recommendations.
If you need assistance with purchasing software, contact ThinkEDU at Thinkedu.force.com/support/s/.
If you need technical support or assistance installing software, please contact our IT HelpDesk at (866) 447-2869 or visit Liberty.edu/hdchat to chat with a support representative.
Personal Hardware & Software Purchases
All links on this page redirect to external vendor websites for orders and purchases. For a complete list of minimum requirements for computers, please review our current recommendations.
For current MBS Direct orders, or assistance with software titles purchased before 7/30/2021, please click this link.
ThinkEDU Frequently Asked Questions"
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/support/desktop-management/","Desktop Management manages the behavior of University-owned computers, provides reporting on them, and maintains the computer management tools. The Desktop Management team also conducts research and development to make sure Liberty University’s computers are using the latest technologies and to improve their stability, performance, and security.
Services provided by Desktop Management
Operating System deployment
Software deployment
Software updates
Computer settings management
Computer asset reporting"
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/support/computers-as-a-service/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/computer-labs/","General Information
The Information Technology Computer Labs are academic facilities across Liberty University’s campus that are dedicated to public service. We are a component of the IT Customer Support staff under the direction of Information Services. As such, we offer technical services to our guests, primarily providing direction and assistance to students, staff and faculty members. Please visit our DeMoss Hall Support Desk for any questions or concerns.
Our team is responsible for labs across campus and we are always looking to improve our facilities and customer service. We value your feedback! Please feel free to fill out a comment card at the Support Desk in the DeMoss Hall lab or complete an online survey at www.liberty.edu/computerlabfeedback.
Printing and Charges
Printing and copying is available at the DeMoss Hall Labs and the Jerry Falwell Library. Please view Printing Details for more information. Prices are subject to vary depending on your affiliation with Liberty University. Please ask a staff member for pricing information.
Tutorials
Assistance with common issues
Accounts and Passwords
Connect to Wireless Networks
Printing on Liberty’s Campus
File Storage Options
DeMoss Hall Labs – Hours of Operation*
Monday-Thursday: 7:30am – 11:30pm
Friday: 7:30am – 10:00pm
Sat-Sun: Closed
*Hours may be different during school breaks
Jerry Falwell Library
See Main Library Hours"
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/support/lifecycle-management/","Computer Lifecycle Management is moving from a once-a-year program to a program that is ongoing throughout the year. Devices will be replaced on an “as-needed” basis with a newer working device from our stock. This will ensure that employees always have a working device that will meet the job requirements of their position. Computer replacements (LCM) can be completed through the computer repair process or through a process where the IT Helpdesk reaches out to facilitate a computer replacement. This means that as a device becomes eligible, you will be contacted for replacement options. For information on how devices are assigned, please see the FAQs for Computers as a Service.
What is Lifecycle Management (LCM)?
The Lifecycle Management program facilitates a centralized replacement of aging desktop, laptop, and tablet computers in use by University faculty and staff. Instead of individual departments spending numerous hours attempting to determine what needs to be replaced, the University utilizes a regular refresh cycle that ensures that all faculty and staff receive updated equipment over regular intervals of time. Departments are not expected to budget for and replace their laptops, tablets and desktops. Instead, this task is handled by Information Technology at no cost to departments. This program does not cover replacement of accessories (monitors, docking solutions, video adapters, etc.) and departments should budget accordingly to cover these costs. If your device type or specifications are no longer meeting the needs of your assigned job role, whether LCM eligible or not, please see the “Requesting a different device configuration?” section below.
Requesting a different device configuration?
If the device that you are assigned is not meeting requirements of the job role, you can request a different device through a Computer Assignment ticket. Through this Computer Assignment ticket, you’ll be required to provide adequate justification for a different device or upgraded specifications. Additionally, we would need approval from your Supervisor or Manager before the IT evaluation for upgrade approval. If the provided justification does not support the decision for a different or upgraded device, you will be informed of next steps through your submitted Computer Assignment ticket.
What is needed to request a different device or upgraded specifications through the Computer Assignment ticket?
Your information: Name, username, Department, contact information
The type of device you’re requesting: Laptop, Desktop, or Tablet
Manager or Supervisor approval (this does not guarantee IT approval)
Justification should include: 
Explanation of job duties
Software requirements for job duties
Explanation of why the current device is not meeting the requirements
If further information is required, the IT Helpdesk will reach out to you
iPad and Non-standard Consumer Grade Laptop and Tablet
iPads and non-standard consumer grade laptops and tablets will be replaced when they can no longer run a supported operating system or the operating system is deemed to be unsecure, etc.
iPads and non-standard devices up for replacement will be evaluated for use-case. If the user/department no longer has a supported use-case the device must be returned to IT for disposal, but will not be replaced.
Security of the device is Information Technology’s primary requirement and concern. When a device is unable to run a secure/supported Operating System (OS) it is vulnerable to security breaches and University information can be at risk. IT will notify departments and users of unsecure/unsupported devices as soon as possible, so that the device can be replaced or surrendered to IT.
IT Surplus Buyback Program
As part of the Lifecycle Management program, Liberty University will be offering a computer buyback options to all faculty and staff for personal use only. Devices will be available on a first-come-first-served basis.
It is important to note that when repurchasing the computer, all University licensed software will be removed from the hard disk and a fresh installation of the original Windows® operating system will be installed.
There will be no other special software on the computer and it will no longer be supported by Information Technology. Instead, the employee should only contact Information Technology for assistance and repair for the Liberty-owned computer. These computers will not be eligible to be repurchased or redeployed by University departments.
For buyback-specific questions or to make a purchase, please contact IT Surplus by email at LUSurplus@Liberty.edu or by phone at (434) 592-7006. You can also visit the website www.Liberty.edu/Surplus."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/ads/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/office-of-cio/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/support/it-surplus/","Desktops and Laptops for Sale
Liberty University IT Surplus offers used computers and accessories for sale via the auction site GovDeals. You can check out our current offerings by going to our GovDeals auction page.
Faculty and Staff can email ITInventory@liberty.edu to request current stock of laptops and desktops for sale. By partnering with the HelpDesk, available models will be set up to purchase both on-campus at the Green Hall (1539) and DeMoss Hall (2414) HelpDesk Offices and at our 12th Street location. For those wishing to view devices in person, we ask for 24 hours notice to schedule a time. 
Payment will be handled via a link to our online storefront that will be sent out to customers and covers our transfer of ownership policies as well.
Please Note: Availability and quantity of items will vary throughout the year, and no guarantees are made of what will be submitted for sale.
Faculty and Staff Buybacks
Liberty University Faculty and Staff have the option of buying back their computers during the Life Cycle Management process. Please speak with the HelpDesk technician handling the transfer of your computer to start that process if you are interested in buying back your old device.
Important Information:
NO WARRANTY on these computer is available. All items are sold as-is.
NO SUPPORT is available for these computers from the IT HelpDesk.
WE WILL NOT SHIP COMPUTERS; all purchases must be made IN PERSON at our warehouse.
These computers are surplus computers that have been used by Liberty faculty & staff and serviced by our IT department and may have scratches, dents, or other imperfections.
The batteries on our laptops may be older and may not hold a charge as long as a newer battery.
We are not responsible for any errors or omissions in our listings.
For buyback devices purchased by Faculty or Staff: Acceptable payments for computers include cash (exact amount please) and major credit & debit cards. We are not able to accept checks."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/enterprise-architecture/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/it-dev/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/broadcast-team/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/information-services/operations/","When autocomplete options are available, use up and down arrows to review and enter to select."
"https://www.liberty.edu/HelpDeskDIY","Featured
No content to display 
Most Useful
Article Metadata KB0010087 v17.0 Article has 1490 views updated 2 months ago Article has rating - 4 out of 5 stars 
Article Metadata KB0010150 v15.0 Article has 7993 views updated 3 months ago Article has rating - 4 out of 5 stars 
Article Metadata KB0013351 v12.0 Article has 17371 views updated 12 months ago Article has rating - 4 out of 5 stars 
Article Metadata KB0016338 v15.0 Article has 20599 views updated 2 months ago Article has rating - 4 out of 5 stars 
Article Metadata KB0017152 v49.0 Article has 24974 views updated 11 days ago Article has rating - 4 out of 5 stars 
Most Viewed
Article Metadata KB0017152 v49.0 Article has 24974 views updated 11 days ago Article has rating - 4 out of 5 stars 
Article Metadata KB0013871 v13.0 Article has 20691 views updated 12 months ago Article has rating - 5 out of 5 stars 
Article Metadata KB0016338 v15.0 Article has 20599 views updated 2 months ago Article has rating - 4 out of 5 stars 
Article Metadata KB0013351 v12.0 Article has 17371 views updated 12 months ago Article has rating - 4 out of 5 stars 
Article Metadata KB0010150 v15.0 Article has 7993 views updated 3 months ago Article has rating - 4 out of 5 stars"
"https://www.liberty.edu/about/a-z-index/","A-Z Index
A B C D E F G H I J-K L M N-O P Q-R S T U-Z
A
88.3 The Journey
90.9 The Light
About Liberty
Academic Calendar
Academics
Academic Success Center (ASC)
Access Control
Accreditation
Administrative Accounting
Admissions
Aeronautics, School of
Air Force ROTC
Alexander Hamilton Society
Allied Health Professions, Department of
Alluvion Stage Company
Alpha Lambda Delta (CASAS Honor Society)
Alpha Phi Sigma (Criminal Justice Honor Society)
Alumni
Army ROTC
Arts and Sciences, College of
ASIST
Associate Degrees
Athletics
Athletic Training Lab
Auxiliary Services
» top
B
Bachelor’s Degrees
Bands (University Bands)
Behavioral Sciences, School of
Biblical Studies, Department of
Biology and Chemistry, Department of
Biomechanics Lab
Black Law Student Association
Board of Trustees
Bookstore
Brand Identity Guide
Business, School of
» top
C
Calendar (University Events)
Campus Recreation
Career Services
Certificate Programs
College of Applied Studies and Academic Success (CASAS)
Center for Academic Development (CAD)
Center for Apologetics
Center for Chaplaincy
Center for Counselor Education and Family Studies
Center for Creation Studies
Center for Cyber Excellence
Center for Engineering Research and Education (CERE)
Center for Entrepreneurship
Center for Financial Literacy (CFL)
Center for Law and Government (CLG)
Center for Music Education and Performance
Center for Music and Worship
Center for Pre-Law Studies
Center for Youth Ministries
CFAW (College For A Weekend)
(The Liberty) Champion Student Newspaper
Child Advocacy Society
Christian/Community Service (CSER)
Christian Leadership and Church Ministries, Department of
Christian Legal Society
Cinematic Arts (Zaki Gordon Center)
CLEP
Club Sports
College For A Weekend (CFAW)
College of Arts and Sciences
College of Osteopathic Medicine (LUCOM)
Communication and the Arts, School of
Community Care and Counseling, Department of
Community Life Office
Commuter Student Life
Complaints
Computer Labs
Continuing Education
Convocation
Counselor Education and Family Studies, Department of
Course Catalogs
Creation Studies Center
Criminal Justice Club
Cyber Excellence Center
» top
D
Debate Team
Degree Completion Plans (DCP)
Department of Allied Health Professions
Department of Biblical Studies
Department of Biology and Chemistry
Department of Christian Leadership and Church Ministries
Department of Community Care and Counseling
Department of Counselor Education and Family Studies
Department of Digital Media and Journalism
Department of English
Department of Family and Consumer Sciences
Department of Global Studies
Department of General Math and Science
Department of History
Department of Interdisciplinary Studies
Department of Mathematics
Department of Modern Languages
Department of Psychology
Department of Public and Community Health
Department of Social Work
Department of Student and Digital Arts
Department of Theatre Arts
Department of Theological Studies
Development Office
Digital Media and Journalism, Department of
Dining Services
Disability Accommodation Support (ODAS)
Divinity, Rawlings School of
Doctoral Degree Programs
Doctrinal Statement
» top
E
Eagle Scholars Program
Education, School of
Ehrhorn Law Library
Employment at Liberty
Engineering Research and Education Center (CERE)
Engineering, School of
English, Department of
Entrepreneurship Center
Equity and Compliance (Title IX) Office
Equity and Inclusion Office
Event Production
Events Calendar (University Events)
Executive Biographies
» top
F
Faith and Service
Family and Consumer Sciences, Department of
Facilities Management
The Federalist Society
Finance and Administration
Financial Aid
Financial Literacy Center
Financial Planning and Budgeting Office
Functional Assessment Lab
» top
G
General Math and Science, Department of
General Education
Give to Liberty
Global Studies, Department of
Government, Helms School of
Graduate Degree Programs
Graduate Student Life
Grants (Faculty) (see Office of Sponsored Programs)
Grants (Students) (see Student Financial Services)
» top
H
Health Promotion Lab
Health Sciences, School of
Helms School of Government
History, Department of
Hockey, Men’s
Hockey, Women’s
Honors Program
Hospitality & Sport Management, Department of 
Housing (Residence Life)
Human Performance Lab
Human Resources
» top
I
ID and Campus Services
Information Services
Information Technology (INFT)
Interdisciplinary Studies, Department of
Institutional Effectiveness and Research, Office of
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC)
Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC)
Institutional Review Board (IRB)
International Law Society
International Student Admissions
International Student Center (ISC)
Intramural Sports
IT Customer Support
IT HelpDesk
IT Marketplace
» top
J-K
Jazz Ensemble
Jerry Falwell Library (JFL)
The Journey (88.3)
Kappa Delta Pi (Education Honor Society)
Karen Kingsbury Center
» top
L
LaHaye Ice Center
LaHaye Recreation and Fitness Center
Law, School of
Law Library (Ehrhorn Law Library)
Law Students for Life
Legal Affairs
The Liberty Way
Liberty Worship Collective
Library (Jerry Falwell Library)
Library (Ehrhorn Law Library)
The Light (90.9)
LUCOM (College of Osteopathic Medicine)
LU Shepherd
LU Serve
LU Send
LU Stages
LU Quick Facts
Liberty University Online (LUO)
LUPD (Liberty University Police Department)
» top
M
Maps
Marching Band
Marketing Department
Master’s Degrees
Mathematics, Department of
Minors Programs
Military Affairs
Military Law Society
Missions (LU Send)
Modern Languages, Department of
Music Education and Performance Center
Music and Worship, Center
Music, School of
» top
N-O
News
Newspaper (The Liberty Champion)
Nursing, School of
Office of Community Life
Office of Equity and Compliance (Title IX)
Office of Equity and Inclusion
Office of Financial Planning and Budgeting
Office of Institutional Effectiveness and Research
Office of the Provost
Office of the Registrar
Office of Research Ethics
Office of Spiritual Development (OSD)
Office of Sponsored Programs (OSP)
Offices (list of university offices)
Online Student Life
Orchestra
» top
P
Parent and Family Connections
Photography Department
Pi Sigma Alpha (Political Science Honor Society)
Planning and Construction
Police Department (LUPD)
Policy Directory
Postal Services
Postgraduate Degree Programs
Pre-Law Society
Pre-Medical Honor Society
Printing Services
Procurement & Payment Services
Provost Office
Psychology, Department of
Public and Community Health, Department of
» top
Q-R
Quality Enhancement Plan (QEP)
Rawlings School of Divinity
Registrar’s Office
Research at Liberty
Research Ethics Office
Residence Life
ROTC (Air Force)
ROTC (Army)
» top
S
School of Aeronautics
School of Behavioral Sciences
School of Business
School of Communication & the Arts
School of Divinity (John W. Rawlings)
School of Education
School of Engineering
School of Government (Helms)
School of Health Sciences
School of Law
School of Music
School of Nursing
Sigma Tau Delta (English Honor Society)
Simulation Center (Nursing)
Snowflex
Social Media
Social Work, Department of
Spirit Band
Spiritual Development Office
Sponsored Programs Office
Sport, Event, and Tourism Management, Department of (See Hospitality & Sport Management)
Standardized Patient Center
Strategic and Personal Communication, Department of
Strategic Intelligence Society
Student Accounts (see Student Financial Services)
Student Activities
Student Advocate Office (SAO) – Online
Student Affairs
Student Bar Association
Student Counseling
Student Financial Services
Student Government Association (SGA)
Student Health Records
Student Service Center
Studio and Digital Arts, Department of
» top
T
Testing Services (CASAS)
Theatre Arts, Department of
Theological Studies, Department of
Ticket Office
Tower Theater
Transfer Guide (Virginia Community College System)
Transfer Students
Transit Services
Transportation Department
Travel Services
Tutoring Services
» top
U-Z
Undergraduate Degree Programs
University Bands
University Calendar
University Events Office
University Offices
Visitors Center
Visual and Performing Arts, School of
Web Resources
Webmail
Willmington School of the Bible
Wind Ensemble
Women’s Hockey
Writing Center
WRVL 88.3 The Journey
Yearbook
YouthQuest
Zaki Gordon Cinematic Arts Center
» top"
"https://www.liberty.edu/graduate/ibc/","Role of the IBC
The Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC) is charged with ensuring that all research involving the use of biohazardous materials at Liberty University is done so in accordance with the law.
The IBC reviews proposed studies involving biohazardous materials to ensure that the materials and personnel involved are safe in accordance with the laws and policies set forth by the NIH and Liberty University. The IBC is also responsible for making sure that all researchers and laboratory personnel are properly trained and equipped to engage in research of this nature.
Your Research Responsibilities
The IBC must approve any teaching or research activity involving the use of recombinant DNA, toxins, or infectious agents. If you are planning to conduct research involving any of these categories, you must seek approval from the IBC.
For additional information or to submit a protocol registration form, contact the IBC."
"https://www.liberty.edu/about/social-media/","Social Media
Official Social Media Networks
The Liberty University Social Media Networks page connects you with all official university-approved social media accounts for departments and schools. Find accounts on Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, LinkedIn, and Pinterest to stay connected with the latest Liberty news!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/campus-logistics/print-and-mailing-services/","Print and Mailing Services
Fulfilling Print and Mailing Needs for Business Units
Located at the 12th Street Warehouse, Print and Mailing Services works with departments and business units at Liberty to produce print pieces and mailing campaigns at a competitive rate. We are also able to serve the general public.
Project Request
To start the printing process with Print & Mailing Services, please complete a project request below.
For Faculty/Staff:
Submit a Project Request
Please contact us for more information or any inquiries regarding upcoming projects. Please be advised, we have up to a five day turnaround on all projects.
About Printing and Mailing Services
We operate a full service state of the art facility, powered by high-end HP presses and machines able to produce small and large format printing. We have the ability to design and print many different things from giant foam boards and whole wall wraps to standard postcards and decals. Along with printing, our Mailing Services division has the ability to process mailings campaigns in a large capacity. We can prepare each mailing and ship it with ease, while with saving your department money with the knowledge and advice on how to send large mailings. All of these services are offered at a reduced competitive rate.
For any project that you wish to have come to life, please contact us. We are willing to walk you though each step of the process and print examples pieces before the actual desired result is printed.
Our Services
Printing
Inserting
Project Planning
Bulk Mail Distribution
Full Service Bindery
Design and pre-press services
Wide format posters, banners, and specialty prints
Lamination services
Folding, creasing, collating, binding, cutting, and laminating
And more!
Popular Products
Banners, Flyers, Posters, Signs, Mounting/Grommets
Business cards, Letterhead, Envelops
Decals, Stickers, Labels, Calendars
Stationery, Promotional materials, Signage
Booklets
Postcards and Magnets
Wall Wraps
Brochures, Newsletters, Magazines, Programs
And more!
Full Service Bindery
Our Bindery service is able to provide the perfect finish for your print project once it comes off our presses. With our high speed equipment, combined with our skilled bindery technicians, we are able to get your project to you quickly, no matter the size.
Putting Projects Together
We offer many binding options to give your project the finish you are looking for.
Coil binding
Perfect Binding
Padding
3 Hole Punch
Saddle stitching
Stapling
Perfect Finish
Our bindery offers many finishing options to give your project the perfect finish you are looking for.
Folding 
Collating
Perforating
Foil
Die Cut
Trimming
Inserting
Lamination
Mail tabbing
Scoring
Numbering
Examples of Previous Projects
Staff
Ronnie Young
Executive Director, Campus Logistics
Tim Baldree
Operations Manager
Heather Cutrer
Project/Creative Manager
Jordan Wright
Project Manager
Caitlin Jamerson
Project Manager
Rachel Baker
Project Manager"
"https://www.liberty.edu/finance-admin/accounting/","Purpose Statement
The Accounting Department provides effective accounting services to ensure compliance with institutional policies, applicable laws and regulations.
To safeguard the assets of the university by the innovative use of resources & collaboration with internal, external customers and stakeholders.
To assist the university in meeting departmental goals, as well as campus wide business goals, while supporting the university Strategic Plan.
The Accounting Department strives to serve the university community in a professional and efficient manner by timely processing financial transactions, providing accounting and financial management services, and producing financial statements which accurately reflect the financial condition of Liberty University.
For general assistance, contact the Accounting Office at accounting@liberty.edu.
Announcements
HR Disbursement vs. Request for Check Forms
Some payments made by the University are paid through Human Resources (HR) instead of Accounts Payable (AP). Due to the nature of these HR disbursements, and the signatures required on Request for Checks (RFC) for these types of payments, we have been requested to implement a form specific for HR Disbursements. Please visit the HR Disbursement vs. Request for Check Forms page for more information.
Request for HR Disbursement
Request for Check (search “Non-PO check request” in buyLU)
Reconfirmation of the Contract Policy: 
Per the President’s direction the following announcement is EFFECTIVE IMMEDIATELY:
All contracts for Liberty University products or services are to be reviewed by Procurement prior to execution. The only personnel authorized to sign contracts are the President, the Chief Financial Officer, the Vice President for Finance or designated personnel in the Procurement office. THE UNIVERSITY WILL NOT RECOGNIZE NOR BE BOUND BY CONTRACTS SIGNED BY ANY OTHER PERSONNEL.
Contracts should be properly routed for review and execution. Please visit the Contracts Office webpage for additional information or contact them directly at contracts@liberty.edu or 592-7050
Important Links:
Review the full Contracts and Policy Procedure.
To assist in the proper routing of contracts, users can utilize the contract routing form, available here: Contracts Routing Form
All other Finance related policies can be found on Financial Planning & Budgeting’s Policies and Procedures page."
"https://www.liberty.edu/security-public-safety/environmental-health-safety/","Environmental Health & Safety

Keeping It Safe: Living, Working, and Learning at LU
The Environmental Health & Safety (EHS) Department is committed to making the living, working, and learning environment at Liberty University safe. It’s our goal to reduce or eliminate occupational injuries/illnesses and financial losses for the university community.
EHS also oversees compliance with local, state, and federal agencies to ensure that policies and regulations are followed.
EHS Staff
EHS Responsibilities
Fire Safety
Hazard Communication
Confined Space Entry
Hazardous Materials Management
Occupational and Construction Safety
Regulatory Compliance
Training for Staff, Faculty, and Students
Participate in our training courses and get equipped with the knowledge you need to improve your work environment.
Register here for Online Training Courses! Course Registration
See the Did You Know? safety announcement for details on accessing our self-paced video training. (MyLU log-in required to access all Safety Announcements.)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/auxiliary-services/","Serving You. Serving Our Campus
The Division of Auxiliary Services provides a wide range of products and services to enhance the educational experience. We serve a vast and diverse customer base that includes students, faculty, staff, alumni, parents, and visitors. If there is a need for pasta, paper, or a pick-me-up from one of the many vending machines on campus, Auxiliary Services strives to accommodate the university community’s needs with exceptional customer service.
See also Laundry Services
Dining Services
Dining Services oversees all food service vendors operating at Liberty University. The office monitors all foodservice operations daily to ensure standards are met at all dining venues including catering and concessions. Dining Services gathers information from students to assess their dining preferences and works through the university’s vendors to meet those needs.
See Dining Services hours, locations, and plans
Pay Vending with Flames Cash & Credit
You can now use your Flames Cash at select snack, food, and hot coffee vending machines at Main Campus and Green Hall locations. Look for the Blackboard card swipe on the Flames Cash devices listed below. To use your Flames Cash, follow the instructions on the screen and then select your product. The amount of the transaction will be deducted from your Flames Cash balance.
Flames Cash Reader Locations
DeMoss Hall-Career Center Snack
DeMoss Hall-Creation Hallway Snack
DeMoss Hall-Creation Hallway Food/Sandwich
DeMoss Hall-Creation Hallway Hot Coffee
DeMoss Hall-Learning Commons Snack
School of Education-Center Hallway Snack
Residence Hall 23-Breezeway Snack
Residence Hall 33-First Floor Snack
Flames Cash Reader Coming Soon
Residence Hall 31-Snack
Tower Theater-Snack
Vines Center-Snack
DeMoss Hall-Printing Services-Snack
Credit card equipped devices
DeMoss Hall-CLAB Snack
DeMoss Hall-Career Center (drink machines only)
Green Hall-Main Entrance (drink, snack, food, and coffee)
Green Hall-Employee Breakroom Snack
Green Hall-TRBC Snack
Snack Food & Vending
Contact: vending@liberty.edu
Liberty University works with valued partners to supply quality beverage, food, and snack products in vending machines conveniently located throughout LU, at both on- and off-campus locations. Our state-of-the-art vending machines are equipped to accept cash, coins, Flames Cash, and major credit cards.
We strive to stock all Liberty University campus beverage machines with an assortment of refreshing items including Coca-Cola products, Dasani water, energy drinks, and juices. If you need to grab food or a snack in a hurry, we stock 24-hour food machines located in DeMoss and Green Hall. Our snack and food machines will satisfy any need or craving, whether it’s for chips, candy, or a healthier option. Some machines house sandwiches and similar items for quick-and-easy lunch options."
"https://www.liberty.edu/finance-admin/budget/","Mission
Our office strives to serve the University community with a friendly, servant oriented mindset. We believe we are called to be good stewards of the resources Liberty University has been entrusted with, and are here to aid Departments in that calling. If you are a Department Budget Manager, Division Leader, Dean, or Administrator, we are happy to assist you in a variety of ways. Whether it’s providing analysis and feedback on your operational budgets, assisting with operational budget development, processing approved budget amendments, or ensuring staff are properly trained in best practices and the University’s financial systems, our Analysts are here to make sure you have all the tools you need to do your job effectively. We also work to provide timely, accurate financial data to University Executives to assist them with institutional decision-making.
For budget, procedure, training, or policy questions, contact your Budget Analyst. We are here to help!
Be sure to check out our Policies & Procedures, Resource and Reference Center, and FAQ pages for helpful tips on managing your budget."
"https://www.liberty.edu/legal-affairs/","The Office of Legal Affairs provides high quality legal services and counsel to our clients, Liberty University and its affiliates.
Legal services are provided by request of the President, the Board of Trustees, and other administrators generally at the Vice Presidential or Director level. The office consists of eight attorneys, support staff, and legal interns who cover a wide area of diverse legal fields. Learn more about the services we provide.
General contract review services, however, are provided by the Procurement & Payment Services Department, which involves the Office of Legal Affairs, as necessary.
The staff is committed to the unique mission of the University and is committed to providing the service to others which is required for the mission to succeed, while maintaining the high standards of a Christian legal professional.
Learn More
About the Office of Legal Affairs
Policies & Procedures
Legal Representation
Legal Resources"
"https://www.liberty.edu/institutional-effectiveness/","Purpose Statement
The Office of Institutional Effectiveness and Research is a team of professionals who support a University-wide effort to promote data-informed decision-making that leads to institutional improvement and enhanced student learning. To do this, the Office staff assists the campus community in the areas of accreditation, assessment, analysis, training, and information dissemination as faculty and staff “Train Champions for Christ.”
Tools"
"https://www.liberty.edu/police/campus-maps/","Campus Maps"
"https://www.liberty.edu/marketing/","Industry Experts Helping You Reach Your Marketing Goals
The Liberty University Marketing Department is the “face of Liberty” and promotes all facets of the university. Our award-winning team of industry experts utilizes advertising and promotion, direct mail, and digital media to create compelling and strategic marketing materials. We can generate an effective strategy to enhance your department and uphold the Liberty vision.
Your project coordinator will review your request and may contact you if additional information is needed. A tentative deadline will be set according to project timelines.
View the Project Process
Marketing Resources
Downloads
Liberty University-branded images are available for your computer wallpaper background, desktop telephone background, and PowerPoint templates.
Marketing Initiatives"
"https://www.liberty.edu/finance-admin/procurement/","Procurement & Payment Services
Official Announcements
9/2023 – Our Sole Source Policy has been published. To view the policy, please visit our Procurement Document Library. To learn more about the new policy, please view the New Sole Source Policy Announcement.
7/2023 – Infor Update on 7/27/2023: If you are experiencing issues with viewing all of your waiting ERs (Create, Returned, Rejected statuses) in your “My Documents” tab – please click on the “filter” and reset it to be turned off. This is even if it already says turned off. After doing this once, you shouldn’t need to do it again. Please contact the P-Card Office with any questions.
Procurement Training Sessions
Use the links below to access our upcoming Procurement training sessions! All trainings are hosted exclusively online with Microsoft Teams unless otherwise noted.
* The Enterprise Sourcing Training is also available in-person. If you are interested in attending this way, please email buylu@liberty.edu.
RECEIVE & PAY
Please visit our link above. Benefits include:
Request assistance from our teams on receiving items.
Learn the proper procedures from our Payment Services team for handing payments.
Provide information to your vendor on our various payment options/processes.
REPORT & MANAGE
Benefits include:
Request spend/utilization reports on demand for your department.
Identifying unknown areas of spend and providing greater visibility for all transactions.
Popular interest points and trends, spend tracking, contracts, and canned/tailored dashboards."
"https://www.liberty.edu/planning-and-construction/","Providing oversight and management for all construction projects at Liberty University, the Planning & Construction department applies world-class strategic planning to individual projects as well as to the performance of the entire campus.
In cooperation with key players like engineers, architects, and contractors, our department ensures that every university project meets the appropriate building codes, addresses the needs of students, faculty, and staff, and falls within the established budget.
Beginning in 2004, under Senior Vice President Charles Spence and now continuing under Vice President Daniel Deter and staff, the Planning & Construction Department has overseen the Liberty University campus expansion and continues to work towards the completion of the Master Campus Plan, which is approved by the president of the university and the presiding board of trustees.
Campus Master Plan
Campus Map
View Construction Update
New Construction
In order to meet the needs of the Liberty University building campaign, campus construction continues to proceed at an accelerated rate. Following high developmental standards, the Planning & Construction department oversees projects from the preliminary phase to completion.
Construction News
Projects:
Under Construction
Jerry Falwell Center
Commons IV
North Campus Parking Deck
Future Starts
Recently Completed
New Reber Thomas Dining Center
Multipurpose Center
Williams Stadium Renovations
Planning & Construction
Within Planning & Construction are several divisions that meet essential needs like the startup and completion of new projects.
Staff Listing
Planning & Construction divisions include:
Planning, Design, & Engineering
Construction & Quality Control
Space Planning
Electrical Construction
Site Utility Planning"
"https://www.liberty.edu/casas/academic-success-center/","Reach Your Academic Goals
Let us help you reach your academic goals with our uniquely designed services and programs. Located in DeMoss Hall, the Academic Success Center (ASC) provides a range of programs that will help meet your learning needs while at Liberty University. We offer both individual and group experiences through our tutoring services, writing services, success studies, and our academic workshop series.
Services
Tutoring Services
Tutoring Services
Get the support you need with our Tutoring Services. We offer tutoring help, at no additional cost, in a wide variety of classes including accounting, biology, chemistry, languages, mathematics, and more.
Writing Center
Writing Center
Whether you have a completed paper or haven’t yet begun, the Writing Center can help. Have one of our peer coaches look over your work to give it a polished finish.
Success Studies
Success Studies
Strengthen your academic performance with our Success Studies courses. Gain study strategies through skills courses.
Resources
Academic Mentoring

Academic Mentoring
Boost your academic skills with Academic Mentoring. Get individualized tips and strategies for academic success by receiving one-on-one mentoring with faculty mentors and peer mentors.
Workshop Series

Workshop Series
Achieve academic success through Workshops. Topics include study skills, motivation, goal setting, and time management.
Virtual Learning

Virtual Learning
Learn more about how you can succeed in your academic studies with Virtual Learning.
Success Tips & Resources

Success Tips & Resources
A collection of Tips and Resources designed to provide you with tools and resources to assist you."
"https://www.liberty.edu/center-for-academic-development/","The Center for Academic Development – Teaching Excellence serves as a central location for professional development and the collection and dissemination of information relevant to the promotion of excellence in teaching and learning at Liberty University. We offer a robust number of services for online and residential faculty.
Here’s What’s Happening:
Center for Teaching Excellence Newsletter
We are excited to release the latest edition of the Center for Teaching Excellence newsletter. Click here to read NEWSLETTER. It is packed with valuable information, as well as teaching and technology tips. We hope that you take a few minutes to review. Please reach out with questions, or if we can be of assistance.
Optional residential faculty professional development brought to you by the Center for Teaching Excellence (CTE). Register via the Course Registration tool in myLU (Subject Code: PDCT). Email cte@liberty.edu with questions. For workshops/webinars held via Microsoft Teams, links will be sent to registered participants in advance.
Building Interactive Presentations with Adobe Express Page; Friday, Sept. 1
10:30–11:15 a.m.; DeMoss Hall, Room 3066 and MS Teams
Creating Practice Quizzes with Top Hat; Monday, Sept. 4
10:30–11:15 a.m.; DeMoss Hall, Room 3066
In-Person Book Study: Practicing Thankfulness (Meeting 1 of 3); Tuesday, Sept. 5
10–11 a.m.; DeMoss Hall, Room 3066
Providing Assignment Feedback; Wednesday, Sept. 6
Noon–12:45 p.m.; MS Teams
Tips for Grading Efficiently Using Canvas Features; Friday, Sept. 8
10:30–11:15 a.m.; DeMoss Hall, Room 3066 and MS Teams
Creating Tests and Quizzes in Canvas; Monday, Sept. 11
10:30–11:15 a.m.; DeMoss Hall, Room 3066 and MS Teams
Building Community Through Video; Wednesday, Sept. 13
Noon–12:45 p.m.; MS Teams
Faith Across the Disciplines with Scotty Curlee (School of Communication & the Arts); Thursday, Sept. 14
8:15–9:15 a.m.; DeMoss Hall, Room 3066
Creating High-Impact Visuals with Canva; Friday, Sept. 15
10:30–11:15 a.m.; DeMoss Hall, Room 3066
Setting Up Group Assignments in Canvas; Monday, Sept. 18
10:30–11:15 a.m.; DeMoss Hall, Room 3066 and MS Teams
Class/Group Meetings with Microsoft Teams; Wednesday, Sept. 20
Noon–12:45 p.m.; MS Teams
Updating Your RESDEV and the Course Copy Process; Friday, Sept. 22
10:30–11:15 a.m.; DeMoss Hall, Room 3066
Interpreting New Analytics in Canvas; Monday, Sept. 25
10:30–11:15 a.m.; DeMoss Hall, Room 3066 and MS Teams
Services Spotlight: Meet IT Services; Wednesday, Sept. 27
Noon–12:45 p.m.; MS Teams
Online Book Study: Thrive Online (Meeting 2 of 4); Thursday, Sept. 28
Noon–1 p.m.; MS Teams
Ensuring Your Courses Align with Liberty’s Canvas Template; Friday, Sept. 29
10:30–11:15 a.m.; DeMoss Hall, Room 3066
Congratulations to the 2022-2023 President’s Award Winners!
The purpose of the award is to recognize teachers who have promoted significant student learning- evidenced by creative and innovative approaches to teaching, the effective use of instructional technology, and exceptional pedagogical skill. Additionally, their impact on student faith, thought, and character fully realizes Dr. Falwell’s vision of training leaders in all discipline areas. The award process involves a formal peer nomination, dean support, faculty input, and student contribution. Winners are determined by the Selection Committee and affirmed by the Provost. Faculty, Instructional Mentors, and other peers who have direct knowledge of a nominee’s qualifications and experience in demonstrating excellence in teaching may nominate a deserving full-time faculty member in the following categories: Undergraduate and Graduate. 
Liberty University Undergraduate
Crystal Passburg, School of Health Sciences
David Schweitzer, College of Arts and Sciences
Liberty University Graduate
Andrew Walker, College of Arts and Sciences
James Zabloski, School of Divinity
Melissa Stewart, Helms School of Government
CTE Director’s Award for Excellence in New Faculty Mentoring 
This award recognizes seasoned faculty mentors’ extraordinary dedication to supporting new colleagues in the Koinonia Mentoring Program. Mentors meet monthly with their mentees, offering advice, support, and encouragement to new faculty members. Award recipients are selected based on mentee nominations and determined by a scoring committee.
Congratulations to the recipient of the 2022-2023 Director’s Award for Excellence in New Faculty Mentoring, Dr. Gary Isaacs. 
Congratulations to the 2023-24 ILLUMINATE Grant Recipients!
The ILLUMINATE Grants for the Improvement of Teaching are designed to encourage faculty to enhance instruction through the introduction of new pedagogical and active learning techniques, activities, and/or learner-centered experiences. Grants are awarded on a competitive basis. Confidential scoring committees evaluate applicants on the grant’s purpose, student engagement, higher-order thinking, and potential to impact student learning.
A Tour of Thomas Jefferson’s Virginia Homes (Lisa Campbell and Kevin Layell; College of Arts and Sciences)
Augmenting Fashion Design (Kim Cashman and Samantha Pearce; College of Arts and Sciences)
Can You Understand Me Now? Interpreting Transmission Equipment for Future Interpreters (Andrew Milacci; College of Arts and Sciences)
North American Christians in Social Work Service-Learning Opportunity (Cheryl Nitz; School of Behavioral Sciences)
Enhancing Practical Applications for Assurance and Attestation Learning for Accounting Students (Charlene Geisler; School of Business)
Excellence in Human Performance: Conversing With One of the World’s Best Sports Performance Scholars and Practitioners (Andy Bosak, Jim Schoffstall, and Tate Fonville; School of Health Sciences and School of Engineering)
Exploring the Intersection of Public Health Policy (Jonathan Giles and Kahlib Fischer; School of Health Sciences and School of Government)
Floral Design Workshop (Chelsea Milks; College of Arts and Sciences)
History Through Experience: Historic Jamestown and Yorktown (Samuel Smith, Donna Donald, and Christopher Jones; College of Arts and Sciences)
Holocaust Education: Exposing Students to the Holocaust (David Snead; College of Arts and Sciences)
Intentional Engagement: Using Manipulatives and Cooperative Learning Tools in the Foreign Language Classroom (Alisha Castañeda and Stephanie Blankenship; College of Arts and Sciences)
Kingdom Advisors (Stacie Rhodes and Kurt Cornfield; School of Business) 
LEARN 2 LEAD Through LUNCH & LEARN (Roger Mackey; College of Applied Studies and Academic Success)
Liberty University Apiary Project (Morgan Roth, Kyle Harris, and J. Thomas McClintock; School of Health Sciences)
Multidisciplinary Engineering Design: A Hands-on Robot Design (Howie Fang; School of Engineering)
Preparing for Excellence: A SHRM Body of Applied Skills and Knowledge Model Exploration (Tammy Brown; School of Business)
Social Welfare Policy: Social Work Field Trip to Richmond: Legislative Process and Cultural Education (Elke Cox and Aaron Wright; School of Behavioral Sciences)
UR LUved (Cindy Goodrich and Dana Woody; School of Nursing)
CTE Faculty Fellow Program
As part of its commitment to best practices, the Center for Teaching Excellence seeks Faculty Fellows to draw upon their talents. The CTE Faculty Fellow role is an exclusive opportunity for past President Award for Excellence in Teaching winners to become featured speakers at CTE’s January Conference and during semester workshops. Additionally, Faculty Fellows are recognized at various events throughout the academic year. This program involves a competitive application process.
Meet our 2022-23 Faculty Fellow:
Dr. Travis Holt
Assistant Professor of English
College of Arts and Sciences
Travis Holt was a 2021 recipient of the President’s Award for Excellence in Teaching. He earned his Ph.D. in English from Old Dominion University in 2022. He has served as an Assistant Professor of English in the College of Arts and Sciences since 2014. During this time, Holt has developed several courses, both on the undergraduate and graduate levels, including Basic Writing, Composition and Rhetoric, Classic Rhetoric, and Modern Rhetoric. He is the primary instructor for ENGL 101. Holt also serves as the Faculty Athletics Representative.
Center for Academic Development News
Visit the Faculty Workshops page for:
Workshop Calendar
Faith Integration Workshops
Faculty Book Studies"
"https://www.liberty.edu/center-for-law-government/","Hands-On Political Experience
Develop skills in politics and policy while you prepare to engage in today’s generation of American statesmanship. Through the Center for Law & Government (CLG) you’ll gain an even greater appreciation for our Constitution and for the value of our freedom. The CLG, a collaboration between the School of Law and Helms School of Government at Liberty University, is a state and national stage for the free exchange of ideas and the robust debate of issues of national and state importance. Harnessing broad expertise, the Center promotes public policy that is consistent with fundamental principles of American freedom: self-government, free enterprise, and the rule of law.
At the CLG

Joel Cox
After retiring from police service, Dr. Joel Cox transitioned to full-time teaching at Liberty University. Dr. Cox sees his mission as training young men and women in the praxis of policing to become Christian influencers in the broad spectrum of the criminal justice industry. Dr. Cox serves as co-chair of the Center for Law & Government as well as Interim Dean for the Helms School of Government..
Morse Tan
Ambassador Morse H. Tan served as the first Asian-American Ambassador at Large in U.S. history, and he is currently the second Korean-American law school dean in the nation’s history. Dean Tan also serves as the co-chair of the Center for Law & Government.
News on the Center’s beginnings
Liberty aims to influence public policy with new Center for Law & Government
Liberty promotes studies in preserving American freedom
Meet the Center for Law & Government’s Fellows
Phillip Kline
Associate Professor of Law
and Fellow for the Center for Law & Government
Rena Lindevaldsen
Professor of Law and Fellow for the Center for Law & Government
Yuri Mantilla
Professor of Law and Fellow for the Center for Law & Government
Jeffrey Tuomala
Professor of Law and Fellow for the Center for Law & Government
Washington leaders inspire Liberty University summer interns working in the nation’s capital
Over two dozen Liberty University students from the Washington Fellowship program joined Liberty alumni at the U.S. Capitol on Wednesday afternoon to participate in the Washington Symposium hosted by Liberty’s Center for Law & Government. Liberty guests included Robert Hurt, former U.S. Congressman and current executive director of the center, Dean B. Keith Faulkner of Liberty University School of Law, and Kenny Craig, director of Government Affairs. Read full Liberty News Service article"
"https://www.liberty.edu/center-for-research-scholarship/","Championing Research and Scholarship
The Center for Research & Scholarship (CRS) coordinates and supports new and ongoing research initiatives for both faculty and students at Liberty University. If you are interested in pursuing internally sponsored research projects, please visit the Award Funds page. If you are interested in pursuing externally sponsored research projects, please visit the Office of Sponsored Programs (OSP).
Faculty and Student Showcase
We are pleased to showcase innovative and exciting faculty and student research and scholarship projects that are preparing students for future academic and marketplace success.
Curricular Actions
Students in the undergraduate residential academic experience will build knowledge, values, and skills in research and scholarship through a scaffolding curriculum, which includes the following courses:
Through the Inquiry 101 course, freshmen and transfer students will gain an understanding of the value of research and the role of research and scholarship in the life of a university student.
Through the Research 201 course, sophomores and transfer students will develop the knowledge and skills required to engage in research and scholarship across the humanities, sciences, and creative arts.
This research training experience will culminate in opportunities to take program-specific, Research-Intensive courses, in which upper-level classmen will design a research proposal or project that is discipline-specific.
Co-Curricular Actions
Undergraduate residential students have opportunities to develop as professionals who are ready to meet the challenges of the twenty-first century. All students will have the opportunity to disseminate their work at Liberty University’s annual Research Week. Students also have the opportunity to apply for travel awards to fund the dissemination of their research at external conferences or meetings.
Professional Membership Opportunities
Liberty University is proud to be an Enhanced Institutional Member of the Council on Undergraduate Research (CUR). The enhanced institutional membership allows all administrators, faculty, staff, and students of Liberty to join the Council on Undergraduate Research, at no cost."
"https://www.liberty.edu/engineering/cere/","Impact Industry and Education with CERE
Join us at Liberty University’s Center for Engineering Research & Education (CERE) in Bedford County, Va., and help promote research and development through our upcoming state-of-the-art industry labs.
Research as a Student
There are many research opportunities within the School of Engineering. Undergrad students have the opportunity to come alongside world-class research professors and assist in the research process and writing of articles for academic journals. Undergrad students have even had the opportunity to present their papers and research at conferences across the United States alongside their professors.
Graduate students are assigned an Academic Advisor/Research Professor. These students have the opportunity to research and write under the guidance and tutelage of their Advisor.
Higher Education and CERE
Uniting industry and academics, CERE provides a working platform for research and higher education. Our industry-sponsored labs will help meet industry needs, foster academic research pursuits, and provide work opportunities for students.
Students from across the state of Virginia and Liberty University will benefit from opportunities to observe and assist with research in the fields of science and engineering. Together, we will provide a unique place of learning, research, and training to equip our future workforce to meet and lead the energy challenges and needs for the next decade.
Become an Industry Affiliate
When you partner with CERE, your organization joins Liberty University in a commitment of time, resources, and support to help meet industry energy needs for the future.
Your involvement will aid in enhancing and developing new technologies and the future workforce. It will help grow the global energy industry through applied research and education as well as benefit advanced manufacturing companies across the Commonwealth.
Industry Labs include:
Chemical / material lab
EMC (electromagnetic compatibility) lab
3D Prototype Lab
Calibration lab
Non-destructive testing lab
Machine Shop
CERE Staff & Board
CERE Assistant Director
Facilities & Lab Support Manager
CERE Administrative Coordination
View all School of Engineering Faculty and Staff.
See the CERE Board of Advisors.
Contact
CERE
1173 Research Way
Forest, VA 24551
(434) 582-8662"
"https://www.liberty.edu/graduate/iacuc/","The IACUC
The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) reviews proposed studies involving animals to ensure that the animals are treated ethically and humanely, in accordance with the laws and policies set forth by the USDA, OLAW, and Liberty University. The IACUC also:
Ensures that all researchers and laboratory personnel are properly trained in the handling and care of animals.
Approves any teaching or research activity involving the use of vertebrate animals."
"https://www.liberty.edu/provost/","The Provost serves as the primary voice on academic matters within the administration and is the second-ranking academic official of the University, after the President. In collaboration with the deans, the Faculty Senate, and the General Faculty, the Provost & Chief Academic Officer develops and implements the academic vision and values of the University.
These core values are engaged through the various academic programs offered in multiple delivery formats, as well as through the teaching, research, and service activities of the academic centers. The Provost & Chief Academic Officer provides leadership in continuously improving undergraduate and graduate instruction and academic support services.
The provost bears responsibility for:
Budgeting and evaluation for all academic divisions
Working with the deans to identify and prioritize resource allocations among academic units
Assessing the performance of academic leaders to provide regular feedback to encourage improvement
Overseeing a structured process through which faculty can develop professionally within their disciplines, improve as effective academic communicators, and utilize the wide array of technological tools and resources available to enrich the art of teaching
Communicating on behalf of the University, serving as the liaison to those external agencies with which the University maintains institutional accreditation
Communicating regularly with the President and the various University constituencies on matters of importance
Serving as the liaison of the administration to the Faculty Senate
Scott M. Hicks, Ph.D.
Provost & Chief Academic Officer
Dr. Scott Hicks came to Liberty University as a professor in 2007 before becoming Dean of the School of Business in 2012. In 2017 he was named Vice Provost of Graduate Education, followed by entering into his current role in 2018 as Provost. By God’s grace, Scott has been able to lead the School and the University in new initiatives and programs. During his tenure, the School of Business created over nine programs with over 65 cognates and/or concentrations, a Center for Entrepreneurship, developed strategic partnerships with global companies such as Adobe, Apple, Aruba, Cisco, and Oracle, and attained ACBSP accreditation for School of Business programs. He continues to be entrusted to oversee the higher education goals of the University as he presently serves as Provost.
Prior to coming to Liberty University, Scott served as Director of Retail Operations for Mansfield Oil Company, one of America’s largest Forbes 400 companies. His service in industry has provided him the practical experience necessary to add value to those in higher education. More importantly, he seeks to glorify God in pursuit of living out Luke 10:27 in his personal and professional life.
Dr. Hicks holds a Ph.D. in Business Administration with concentrations in Financial Management and International Business from Northcentral University, an M.B.A. from Liberty University, and a B.S. in Business Management with specializations in Finance and Management from Liberty University."
"https://www.liberty.edu/graduate/irb/","Case Report Publication Guidance: IRB Review and HIPAA Compliance
Background:
Many journals require a letter, or other acknowledgement, from an IRB before they will publish a case report. Specifically, journals wish to know whether IRB approval was obtained or not required for the described case. LU’s IRB has adopted a policy to address the following questions and answers.
Q: What is a “case report”?
A case report is a retrospective analysis of one, two, or three clinical cases. If more than three cases are involved in the analytical activity, the activity will constitute “research”. Case reports should not be confused with qualitative case studies.
Q: How do I get IRB approval for my case report?
Please submit a case report application to the IRB through email, or Cayuse (if applicable). Download the Case Report Application (docx).
Q: Are there HIPAA implications associated with publication of case reports?
Yes. Under HIPAA, a case report is an activity to develop information to be shared for medical/educational purposes. Although the use of protected health information to prepare the paper does not require IRB review, the author of a case report must comply with HIPAA. Ideally, the author of the article will obtain the signed authorization of the subject, or the subject’s legally authorized representative if the subject is deceased, to use the subject’s information in the article. If it is not possible to obtain authorization, the author should be aware that one of the identifiers described by HIPAA as requiring written authorization is, “Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code….” Moreover, HIPAA requires that, at the time of publication, “[t]he covered entity does not have actual knowledge that the information could be used alone or in combination with other information to identify an individual who is a subject of the information.” (See: Definition of De-Identified Data.)
Authors who remove HIPAA identifiers (including unique patient characteristics) from the data prior to submission and publication of the article do not need to obtain a signed privacy authorization.
Investigators who wish to publish case report data with HIPAA identifiers will need to obtain from the patient a signed HIPAA compliant authorization. This authorization does not need to be submitted to the IRB for review. The appropriate authorization form for use with a single case report may be found on the HIPAA web site HERE.
If the author strips off all HIPAA identifiers, but the information associated with the subject of the article includes a “unique characteristic” which would make it identifiable to the subject, or the author has actual knowledge that the information about the subject could be used alone or in combination with other information to identify the subject, the author must contact the HIPAA Privacy Officer to discuss the required steps to take prior to publication."
"https://www.liberty.edu/casas/academic-success-center/writing-center/","Residential Writing Center
Residential Writing Center
Build the strong writing skills you need for your classes and future career with Liberty University’s Writing Center. Our peer writing coaches are here to help you through all stages of your writing process and with any writing project (academic, professional, or personal) at no additional cost. We offer Liberty University residential undergraduate students one-on-one appointments and Writing Labs (on campus and virtual) during the fall and spring semesters.
Our goal is to help you become a confident and proficient writer at every stage of the writing process. For additional help, see our Writing Aids.
Online Students: See the Online Writing Center
Find What You’re Looking For at the Writing Center
Schedule Your Appointment
One-on-one writing coaching offers residential students assistance from one of our peer writing coaches. Make an appointment to talk about your writing today!
Scheduling Guidelines
To switch your appointment to virtual, please email us.
There is a 24-hour cancellation policy for appointments 
Instructions for canceling an appointment (PDF)
Scheduling Tutorial Video
How to Best Prepare for Your Appointment
For optimal results, it’s beneficial if you do the following:
Bring your assignment 
instructions & rubric
Bring any research you
have conducted so far
Bring a draft if
you have one
Writing Lab
Visit or chat the Writing Lab any time during open hours. No appointment necessary.
Open Monday – Thursday 12 p.m.-9 p.m. and Friday 12 p.m.-5 p.m.
In-Person Writing Lab
Focused environment to work in person and ask quick writing questions. Bring your laptop and assignment materials.
Located in JFL 160 (Dodak Technology Commons)
Virtual Writing Lab
Get answers to quick writing questions! (≤ 10 min.)
During our open hours, chat with a writing coach through the link below.
Chat a Writing Coach
Writing Resources
What Students are Saying About the Writing Center
“I liked the in-depth discussion we had about my motivations and convictions to write, I felt challenged in a good way to bolster and defend my topic well.”
""The writing center gave me helpful feedback and taught me principles that I've been able to use throughout the rest of my writing!""
""I entered when I hadn't scheduled an appointment and they were very gracious and insisted on helping me. I received a very good grade on my essay after exercising the skills they taught me.""
“I liked that my coach was willing to be flexible with how I was working on my essay. I also liked that I was encouraged to figure most revisions out on my own with suggestions versus just being given the correct revision. It will serve to be a good habit for later.”
""I had a very great experience with two [writing coaches] who really helped me. As a result, my writing has improved. I am so grateful for the writing center.
""The people are so nice! I was definitely able to think through my own work more clearly with an active listener there and ready to help.""
Faculty Information
Have students in need of writing assistance? Contact writing@liberty.edu for help in a variety of formats:
Class Presentations/Workshops
Introduction to the Writing Center: 5 min. presentation on our services and how we can help any writer improve
Paper Writing from Start to Finish: 20-50 min. presentation on writing a great academic paper
Formatting an Academic Paper: 10-20 min. presentation on formatting a paper for MLA, APA, or Turabian
Workshop: Request one of our current workshop topics or a custom workshop on writing or formatting
Borrow-a-Coach
Request classroom assistance with one of our peer writing coaches. We can assist individual students in the classroom with content, logical flow, grammatical concepts, format, paragraph unity, structure, and more.
Writing Center for Credit
Create a program where your students can earn regular or extra credit for visiting us. We keep records of every visit to the Writing Center and can report when your students visit us throughout the semester.
Refer any student who received a low grade on an assignment, giving them the opportunity to resubmit it after visiting the Writing Center.
Connect With Us"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/air-force-rotc/","Detachment 890 at Liberty University
Detachment 890 Official Website
Detachment 890 is an Air Force Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (AFROTC) training program based out of the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, Va. Along with Liberty University, Det. 890 also supports cadets from these nearby universities: James Madison University, Piedmont Virginia Community College and Old Dominion University TeleTechnet at PVCC.
The Cadet Corps includes more than a hundred cadets from these universities.
AFROTC is a training program that prepares college students to become officers in the United States Air Force. Students work with Det. 890 to qualify for a commission in the Air Force while simultaneously completing their university undergraduate requirements.
Det. 890’s educational training program emphasizes student involvement and the development of leadership skills. Classes are conducted as seminars and call for active student discussion. In addition, cadets become involved in the management of their own cadet wing through a mandatory weekly two-hour “leadership laboratory.” Cadets are assigned corps positions, with increasing responsibility over the four years. Students also participate in physical training, leadership projects, visits to Air Force bases, orientation flights, and normal college extracurricular activities.
Degree Minor
The ROTC Military Leadership Minor – Air Force is offered through the College of Arts & Sciences."
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/army-rotc/","Are You Army Strong?
Experience Army training and discover what it takes to be an Army Officer. When you enroll in Army ROTC (Reserve Officers’ Training Corps) you can participate with no military obligation.
ROTC is the largest officer-producing organization in our nation’s military.
As a Liberty University cadet with Eagle Battalion, you will experience a combination of daily active duty along with a solid Christ-centered college education. This gives you a well-rounded academic, social, and military experience. Cadet graduates from the Eagle Battalion currently serve in various branches of the U.S. Army across the globe.
ROTC is designed to help you develop into a confident, competent, and adaptive leader. It gives you the basic military skills and leadership fundamentals you’ll need to lead small units and to become a future Army leader.
Army ROTC Fitness
Physical fitness is an important aspect of what you will do in ROTC and reveals:
Your physical fitness level
Your unit’s physical fitness level
Whether you have a fitness deficiency
Any special needs you may have
You will be expected to regularly conduct Physical Readiness Training and take the Army Combat Fitness Test which consists of 6 events:
Modified Deadlift
Standing Power Throw
Hand Release Push-up
Sprint-Drag-Carry
Plank
Two-mile run"
"https://www.liberty.edu/students/student-life/graduate/","We’re Here for You
Get connected to events and services that will develop community among your fellow graduate students. We will support your success through personal and professional development, collaboration with other students, and faculty interaction.
Graduate Professional Series
Graduate Professional Series are monthly workshops that aim to prepare students for success through Graduate School and life in the professional world.
Grad Cafes

Grad Cafes are weekly events for graduate students to have a designated space on campus dedicated to studying and socializing. Each week will come with a fun new theme!
Events
Connect with the graduate community by attending a Graduate Student event. Check out our upcoming events for more information.
The Graduate School
At Liberty University, you have the unique opportunity to study under world-class faculty in a Christian environment. The Graduate School offers a variety of services to aid in your academic journey.
Meet with the Graduate Life Staff
Want to learn more about the resources available to you as a grad student? We’d love to meet with you!
Schedule a Meeting with Graduate Life Staff
Follow us on Instagram"
"https://www.liberty.edu/students/dean/community-life/","Additional Navigation
Learn and Grow As a Community
The Office of Community Life exists to promote Christ-centered community living within The Liberty Way by providing students with educational and developmental programming that enhances their capacity for personal development, interpersonal competence, social responsibility, and cognitive and practical skills.
Why would I meet with Community Life?
Community Life Services
Community Standards
Community Standards address violations of the code of honor in a holistic manner.
Community Standards
The Liberty Way (Student Honor Code)
Mentorship
Connect you with faculty and staff to receive support, guidance, and mentorship.
Mentorship
Mentorship Request Form
Community Life Forms
Group Activity Form
Record Expungement Form
Community Life Resources
Drug and Alcohol Abuse Prevention Program Resources
Suicide Prevention
Hazing Prevention
Other Offices
Counseling & Psychological Services
Commuter Student Life
Residence Life Office
Graduate Student Life
Liberty University Online Student Advocate Office
Dean of Students
LU Shepherd
Office of Disability Accommodation Support
College of Applied Studies and Academic Success
Registrar Office
Dean of Students Resources
Academic Integrity
Academic Integrity
CARE and Support
CARE and Support
Center for Student Thriving
Center for Student Thriving"
"https://www.liberty.edu/career-services/","Career Services connects Liberty University students and alumni with career opportunities through impactful coaching, employer connections, and valuable work experiences. Career Services trains students and alumni to align personal goals, talents, and experiences in support of achieving their vocational goals.
Let us help you get started today.
Career Services
Coaching Services offers a wide variety of professional development services for students and alumni.
Learn More >
Internships support students through experiential learning programs and fellowships and other work experiences.
Learn More >
Events & Workshops provide informational and professional networking opportunities both on-campus and virtually.
Learn More >
Employer Relations build professional relationships with employers and recruiters.
Learn More >
The Washington Fellowship is an competitive internship program for students to spend a semester in the nation’s capital.
Learn More >
Résumé Critique Portal is available for résumé and cover letter critiques.
Learn More >"
"https://www.liberty.edu/osd/lu-serve/cser/","CSER
To train students at Liberty University to apply a biblical worldview as servant leaders, to transform their communities for the glory of Christ, and to use their academics and passions to win at work. Philippians 2:4-5; Matthew 28:19-20. For more information, contact cser@liberty.edu or Chat Live.
CSER Dashboard – Registration and Evaluations
The CSER Dashboard is your home for all things CSER. Register for a new CSER, complete CSER evaluations, and view past and current CSER to see how you are tracking toward your graduation requirements.
Student Dashboard Supervisor Dashboard
We are aware of the error message that iOS users are experiencing. IT is working on a solution for us. In the meantime, you may submit your registration using Google Chrome on a PC.
CSER 100 – Introductory Course
Are you new to LU or a returning student who wants to learn more about CSER? Consider taking CSER 100, an introductory course that can equip you with the knowledge to serve effectively in the community. CSER 100 is an online course designed by LU Serve to educate students about CSER graduation requirements.
Learn More
CSER Now
A wide variety of organizations, both in-person and remote, looking for CSER students right now.
Remote/Virtual
A wide variety of organizations that are offering Remote/Virtual CSER opportunities.
CSER by Major
Hand-picked CSER opportunities designed to work well with specific majors and areas of study.
Local Churches
Established local church partners. Additional churches can be found under the 279-001 course code.
On-Campus
On-campus CSER opportunities including LU organizations, academic departments, and SGA Clubs.
Service-Learning
CSER opportunities that link classroom instruction and knowledge with real-world experiences.
Local Organizations
Established non-profit partners. Additional non-profits can be found under the 399-001 course code.
LU Athletics
Liberty Athletics CSER opportunities for NCAA Teams, Club Teams, and various athletic services.
Create a CSER
Are you wanting to complete CSER with an organization that is not already pre-approved? Create your own CSER by requesting to volunteer with a church or special project. These opportunities are essentially “independent studies” in CSER, which means you can work with your supervisor to customize your service activities. However, they require additional steps for approval, so be sure to submit your request in advance and allow several business days for your request to be processed.
For registration instructions, use the link below:
Request a New Organization 
For general registration questions, visit our Tutorials page or Chat Live.
CSER Resources
Christian/Community Service (CSER) is a community service graduation requirement for all students at Liberty University. Each semester, students should attempt to complete their CSER graduation requirements. For more information, contact cser@liberty.edu or Chat Live."
"https://www.liberty.edu/students/health-wellness/health-records/","Student Health Records
Liberty University cares about the well-being of its students. To maintain the health of our community, Liberty requires students to be immunized according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines. Immunizations and medical history must be documented through your Student Health Form.
Immunization Information
Required Immunizations
How to access the Student Health Form:
Log into your ASIST account.
Click “Student”.
Select “Student Health Form”.
Complete the Immunizations, Medical History, & TB Questions sections.
Please review all of the instructions for the Student Health Form before filling it out. For the Immunization page, you will need to fill in the dates that you received each immunization listed. Once you have put in the dates, click “save” and then print off the form. You must give this Liberty-provided form to your doctor’s office and have them verify your document with their official letterhead or office stamp. You also have the option to provide medical records directly from your doctor’s office or an official document issued from the Department of Health.
After you have your immunization records verified, please upload them to the Student Health Form for approval. There is a documents tab that you can use to upload your document as only one file. Please note that our office must be able to authenticate the origin of your immunization documentation in order for your records to be approved.
Please fill out each page of the form. Once you have completed this, three green checkmarks will show indicating that the form is complete.
Fee Notice: Students who do not complete all three sections will have a $50 health records late fine added to their student account."
"https://www.liberty.edu/student-service-center/","The Student Service Center houses the offices of Financial Aid, Student Accounts, and the Registrar. We help students and parents find answers to their questions and guide them to the correct office for further assistance.
Need a Notary?
The Student Service Center offers free notary services to students, faculty, and staff.
Walk-in notary services available 8-5 PM M-F (closed for Wednesday convocation).
Offices"
"https://www.liberty.edu/facilities-management/","Our Mission
The Facilities Management Division supports the University’s mission through the provision and stewardship of safe, clean, efficient, effective and well-maintained facilities, grounds, and vehicle fleet. We are dedicated to excellence and making a positive difference in the lives of the students, our employees, and our customers throughout the University family.
Liberty University’s Mission Statement
Under Senior Vice President of Facilities Management, Charles Spence, the Facilities Management Division oversees the planning, design, construction, operation, renovation, and maintenance of all University owned facilities and property.
Facilities Management Division includes:
Custodial
Design & Renovations
Grounds
Maintenance
Operations
Sign Management
Transportation
Transit"
"https://www.liberty.edu/finance-admin/procurement/travel/","Travel Services
How to Travel at LU
Find out all you need to know about booking flights, hotels, and vehicles for group or individual trips involving Liberty faculty, staff, students, and more. In addition, get all our policies and procedures on travel, entertainment, and business meal expenditures for domestic and international travel. Also, take advantage of the loyalty rewards programs and reduced rates available to travelers connected to LU.
Per diem rate is now $59/day (same exceptions for first/last day of travel), and mileage rate is now $0.655/mile (same restrictions for first 500 of round trip). 03/07/2023
Concur is here, LU’s online new booking tool for travel. Click the “Book Now” button above. Please use your LU email when logging in. 11/8/2022
For the most current updates, please visit our Announcements page.
Travel Information
Local Discounts – Lynchburg, VA"
"https://www.liberty.edu/security-public-safety/access-control/","Access Control

Badge and Facility Access for Faculty and Staff
Mission & Motto
Mission Statement : Protecting people, property, and a way of life
Motto : “We can be better.”
Team Values
INTEGRITY
We remain trustworthy by demonstrating dependability, honesty, and professionalism as we hold ourselves accountable, serving to honor Christ with our words and actions.
“The integrity of the upright guides them, but the crookedness of the treacherous destroys them.” Proverbs 11:3
SERVICE
We are committed to empowering by serving and educating our community, working diligently to uphold standards of excellence.
“And whatever you do, in word or deed, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him.” Colossians 3:17
SECURITY
We function as an essential resource by providing timely security information, protective measures, and innovative solutions safeguarding our community and assets.
“Let each of you look not only to his own interests, but also to the interests of others.” Philippians 2:4
Liberty’s Access Control office manages badge and facilities access for faculty and staff. If you have a question or need to request badge access, use the buttons below or contact us. For questions concerning your Flames Pass, please visit Liberty’s ID & Campus Services.
Policy and Procedures
Access Control Staff
Contact
Access Control
(434) 592-3749
4550 Mayflower Drive, Lynchburg, VA, 24501
Office Hours
Monday—Friday
8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Closed during Wednesday Convocation"
"https://www.liberty.edu/human-resources/","Human Resources
Targeting Your Success
The Human Resources (HR) Department is here to serve as you pursue and carry out your profession at Liberty University. We offer you exciting employment opportunities, enticing benefits, and practical solutions for your daily needs. And we welcome you to Liberty’s dynamic atmosphere that is uniquely committed to Training Champions for Christ.
The HR Department follows core values of service, excellence, character, and respect. Here, we serve the Liberty community with Christ’s love by cultivating a healthy workplace culture that includes high-performance teams and engaged employees who strive to provide exceptional results.
Employee Quick Links and Announcements
New Employee Orientation
Paid Leave Days
Employee Report of Injury Form
Login to Workday
Workday Benefits Information to Know
Workday Payroll Information to Know
Employee & Faculty Handbooks
CE and DGIA Education Portal
ADP iPay"
"https://www.liberty.edu/marketing/photography/","Photography Team
The Photography Team has an active presence on campus, covering a broad scope of events from sports to Commencement. Our purpose is to visually document the life of Liberty University. We maintain archived photographs, provide images for university websites, create marketing materials for different departments, and provide photographs for the Liberty Journal.
Studio
The Flash Studio can be approached from multiple directions within Green Hall on the north side of Main Campus.
If entering from the bus stop, post office, or Tilley Student Center, follow the main hallway until it turns left. Continue halfway down the hallway until it opens wide to your right, where the Department of Studio & Digital Arts and Department of Theatre Arts share a hallway. The studio is through the double doors on your right, room number GH 1024.
If entering Green Hall from the visitor parking lot through the switchboard lobby area, continue straight through the Department of Studio & Digital Arts and turn left at the end of the hallway. You will notice double doors on your right, and the Flash Studio is immediately through these doors.
Contact Us
Please contact your Project Coordinator for any photography needs. If you do not have an assigned Project Coordinator or have a question, contact our Managing Photographer:
Joel Coleman
LUphoto@liberty.edu
Photography Policy
All photographs are the copyright of Liberty University. All rights are reserved."
"https://www.liberty.edu/police/","LU Police Department
We’re Focused on Your Safety
Sign Up for Campus Alerts
(Log in to myLU first)
The Liberty University Police Department (LUPD) serves and protects our campus community as a full-service law enforcement agency staffed by professional, highly trained personnel as a part of Liberty University’s Office of Security & Public Safety.
LUPD staff consists of police officers, armed security officers, and civilian staff members. All personnel are trained in Basic First Aid, CPR, and AED services.
Our department works to protect you and the entire university community. At times, LUPD will work with the Lynchburg Police Department, other law enforcement agencies, and first responders to ensure your safety.
Get emergency information
Learn about firearms on campus
Schedule fingerprinting"
"https://www.liberty.edu/finance-admin/procurement/vendor-information/","Vendor Information
Become a Vendor at LU
Prospective vendors wishing to be included in a future request for a proposal should email suppliermanagement@liberty.edu with company details. This information will be reviewed by the supplier management team for possible future opportunities. For more information, please visit our Frequently Asked Questions page for more details about supplier setup.
What is required to register as a vendor at LU?
Vendors will need:
W-9
COI (If Applicable) 
Entities – COI Requirements For Entities
Individuals – COI Recommendations For Individuals
Completed ePayables Form – If ACH is desired
Important Information for Vendors
Liberty University maintains a centralized procurement environment. The role of Procurement & Payment Services is to help departments/schools make informed, best-value purchasing decisions. The University buys a wide variety of goods and services in numerous categories. Vendors interested in doing business with Liberty University should familiarize themselves with the following:
Only Procurement is authorized to issue official Purchase Orders on behalf of Liberty University.
Only the President, CFO, and the Procurement Department are authorized to sign contracts or agree to terms on behalf of Liberty University.
Liberty University’s standard payment terms are Net 45 from the date of delivery or date of invoice, whichever is later. For more payment terms, please visit our Payment Services page.
Liberty University has the right to refuse invoice payment to any vendor not authorized to provide goods or services with either an official Purchase Order or a valid contract.
The referenced Purchasing Terms and Conditions apply to all purchases unless changes are expressly authorized in the Purchase Order or Contract.
Parking is at a premium. Vendors visiting campus must get a daily vendor parking pass at the Visitor’s Center or the main entrance of Green Hall in order to park on campus.
Liberty University’s standard delivery requirement is ‘F.O.B. Destination’ with transportation charges prepaid on all orders to the University. There shall also be no fuel surcharge on any order.
The Liberty University Whistleblower Portal is used to report incidents as defined in the Liberty University Whistleblower Policy.
In accordance with our Non-Discrimination Policy, Liberty University does not engage in unlawful discrimination or harassment because of race, color, ancestry, religion, age, sex, national origin, pregnancy or childbirth, disability or military veteran status in its educational programs and activities."
"https://www.liberty.edu/campus-logistics/postal-services/","Postal Services
Shipping, Receiving, and Delivery Services for Faculty and Staff
Serving all postal needs of Liberty faculty, staff, and students the Liberty University Postal Services offers domestic and international shipping options using USPS, FedEx or UPS at a reduced rate.
Student Mail Information Faculty/Staff Mail Information
All Mail/Packages leave campus at 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. Packages are NOT accepted on Saturday or Sunday. We ONLY process International/APO shipments from the hours of 8:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Please contact us for more information. Liberty Postal Services and the Student Mail Center are UNABLE to accept grocery or food deliveries. If students have a delivery to campus from any food or grocery delivery service, the delivery should be delivered to their physical dorm location on campus and coordinated directly with the delivery service. Using your campus mailing address is prohibited as we are unable to accept them at our postal facilities.
Hours of Operation and Important Announcements
Faculty & Staff – Liberty University Postal Services at Green Hall
Monday through Friday– 8:00 a.m. – 4:30 p.m.
Saturday & Sunday – Closed
Students – Student Mail Center
Please visit the Student Mail Center for the current hours of operation.
Beginning Wednesday August 9, the Student Mail Center will be opening at our new location in the back of the old Reber Thomas Dining Hall!! Come visit us at our new location!!
Information
Please email lupo@liberty.edu for questions or concerns you may have regarding Faculty/Staff packages and mail. Please email studentmail@liberty.edu for questions or concerns you may have regarding Student packages and mail.
Location
Faculty/Staff Green Hall Room 1846 located just inside the double doors to the left, before the Student Service Center. Residential Students The Student Mail Center located in the ground level of Commons III.
Our Services
Package/Mail Receive and Delivery
Private Rental Boxes
UPS/FedEx/USPS Shipping
USPS Postage stamps
Domestic
International
Overnight Express
Ground
Certified Mail
Envelopes, Boxes, and Packaging supplies
Delivery Confirmation
Holiday Closings
2023 Holiday Closings – No University Mail Received
New Years Day – January 2nd
Easter – April 10th
Memorial Day – May 29th
Independence Day – July 4th
Labor Day – Monday, September 4th
Thanksgiving – November 23rd and 24th
Christmas – December 22nd and 25th
Staff
Ronnie Young
Executive Director, Campus Logistics 
Lisa Worley
Director, Postal Services 
Amy Houser
Operations Manager, Green Hall Postal Services"
"https://www.liberty.edu/casas/testing/","Testing Services
Our Mission
Liberty University’s Testing Services provides students, faculty, staff, and the community with high-quality testing and instructional assessment services. The center follows the National College Testing Association Professional Standards and Guidelines, as well as governmental regulations that promote responsible fiscal, legal, ethical, and equitable practices. Learn more about the National College Testing Association.
What We Do
Offer computer-based and paper and pencil testing services
Collaborate with faculty and administrators, other colleges and universities, testing companies, and national organizations to keep our services current
Offer a quality testing environment that is clean, comfortable, quiet, and user-friendly
Note: Test-takers must adhere to Testing Services Policies & Procedures.
Announcements:
Due to other testing obligations, we will offer CLEP, DSST, and tests from other institutions testing from 8/21-8/25 only. Testing Services will resume these tests starting 9/26/23.
Please check with your professor to ensure that your test is available for you to take in Testing Services. If your ODAS accommodations require you to have a private room, reader, or scribe, please contact us 48 hours in advance at testingservices@liberty.edu.
Closed: 
September 4, 2023 (Labor Day)
Testing Information for Faculty
Certification Testing
College Credit Exams
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
Exams from Other Institutions
Staff
Contact Testing Center staff by emailing testingservices@liberty.edu or calling (434) 582-2408

Justin Bonheim
Assistant Supervisor,
Testing Services
Emily Yates
Assistant Supervisor,
Testing Services"
"https://www.liberty.edu/events/","University departments may host on-campus events ranging from information tables, meetings, career fairs, banquets, conferences, and more. Let our team work with you on meeting your needs and achieve a successful event.
Click Here to Learn More"
"https://www.liberty.edu/transit/","Back to school service starting Saturday, 8/11:
Saturday, 8/11:
Bus service: 10:00 a.m. – 12:00 a.m.
ODR service: 5:00 a.m. – 1:00 a.m.
Sunday, 8/12:
Bus service: 8:00 a.m. – 12:00 a.m.
ODR service: 5:00 a.m. – 12:00 a.m.
Bus Routes and On Demand Ride schedule:
Route 71 and 72:
6:20 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. Monday through Friday.
10:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. on Saturday.
8:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. on Sunday.
Route 75:
6:30 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Saturday and Sunday. Route 75 does not include LUCOM, Oasis, or David’s Place on the weekend.
Route 78:
7:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
Route 90:
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
On Demand Ride:
5:30 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday.
School Closing Service From Inclement Weather: 
There will be no bus service on or off campus during School closings. We will run ODR once the roads are safe to travel on and will close ODR at 8 pm during school closings.
On Demand Ride:
Liberty University Students, Faculty, and Staff can reserve a ride using MyLU. Once on the app, click My Access from the left-hand menu and open the All Navigation dropdown. Scroll down to find “ On Demand Rides.”
*Facilities covered by Liberty Transit’s bus routes are not part of this service, with the exception of those requiring special ADA services.
Lost and Found:
Items found on Transit Services buses are submitted to the Liberty University Police Department after the bus is cleaned. After 2 business days, those items should be logged in at the LUPD office where they will be available for pickup. Lost and found is located in Green Hall next to the Human Resource Department in the main LUPD office. If you have lost something within the last two days, please call Liberty Transit Services at (434) 592-3640 or contact the Greater Lynchburg Transit Company at (434) 455-5080. View the LUPD website for office hours and contact information.
Resources
HR Applicants Page"
"https://www.liberty.edu/web-services","We Can Help You Create A Great Website
We’re the Web Content Team at Liberty University, and it’s our job to give web content creators like you the best training, tools, and guidance you need to develop an effective website. It’s our goal to help you create a great-looking site for your department that both informs and benefits your target audience.
Here you will find out everything you need to know about getting your site up and running and fine-tuning it to match the web guidelines and policies of Liberty University. If you have any questions along the way, our team is here to help.
Content Guidelines and Procedures
Best Web Practices
Accessibility Guidelines
Campus Map
Copyright and Image Rules
Marketing Branding Guidelines
Style Guide
Voice and Tone Guide
Web Maintenance Procedures
WordPress Support
Are You a Current WordPress User?
As a WordPress user, you are responsible for maintaining your department’s web content. 
Depending upon your role in your department, you may even serve as a point of contact for the Web Content Team. If this is the case, we will contact you when we have questions about your site or if issues arise. 
Here on the Web Services site, you’ll find helpful resources for using WordPress and maintaining your department’s site.
WordPress Tutorials and Walkthroughs
Current User Resources
Check out our Web Content Blog for strategic insight on content, WordPress, accessibility, and more.
Keep your site up-to-date by following our maintenance procedures
Refer to the WordPress Manual"
"https://www.liberty.edu/sponsored-programs/","Pursuing an External Grant? Your Success Starts Here.
Are you a full-time faculty or staff member seeking external funding for your department or project? If so, you’re in the right place.
Approval and involvement from our office are required whenever a grant is submitted that’s associated with Liberty University. OSP will submit all grants on behalf of Liberty University. To ensure a smooth process, applicants must:
Route everything through our office
Submit paperwork 10 business days before sponsor’s deadline
Please note: OSP does not issue grants or awards. For internal LU funding opportunities or questions regarding student grants/scholarships please visit the applicable office(s).
Your First Steps in Seeking a Grant
Not sure where to start? Please review our full grant process for more information!
Contact us at grants@liberty.edu
Create a Pathway to Success Through External Funding
Outside funding comes in many forms and helps faculty secure funding to prepare students with the technology and opportunities they need for their future careers. Faculty from engineering, cybersecurity, and divinity have all had success acquiring grants through our office."
"https://www.liberty.edu/tickets","2023 Hockey Season Tickets
On Sale Now! 
Buy Tickets 
2023 Theatre Season Tickets
On Sale Now! 
Buy Tickets 
2023 Football Season Tickets
On Sale Now! 
More Information 
2023 Hockey Season Tickets
On Sale Now! 
Buy Tickets 
2023 Theatre Season Tickets
On Sale Now! 
Buy Tickets 
2023 Football Season Tickets
On Sale Now! 
More Information 
2023 Hockey Season Tickets
On Sale Now! 
Buy Tickets 
Get Started
Featured Games and Events
The Complete Works of Shakespeare (Abridged)
Liberty Football
VS
New Mexico State University
Liberty University Symphony Orchestra"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/degrees/","Liberty University Is a Leader Among Online Christian Colleges 
You want to make a difference. We do too. That’s why our faith guides everything we do, from how we design our programs to how we serve our students to how we teach our classes.
As Champions for Christ, we are dedicated to championing you – so that you can champion what matters to you.
At Liberty, we have a phrase that drives us: “If it’s Christian, it ought to be better.” As a nonprofit Christian college offering online degree programs, we are committed to better – not for our glory, but for God’s. That’s why we strive to offer you the highest-quality education in an online format that respects your time and other commitments. It’s why we make our online degree programs affordable with scholarships and financial aid. And it’s why we offer rigorous studies not only in theology and divinity, but also in fields like psychology, criminal justice, information technology, nursing, counseling, aviation, and business.
With these online programs, you can add to your existing expertise and become even more competitive in today’s labor market. Lead your industry, go further in your field, or start a new career with an online associate, bachelor’s, master’s, or doctoral degree from Liberty University.
Liberty University Online Programs
Associate degree programs
Bachelor’s degree programs
Undergraduate certificates
Master’s degree programs
Doctoral and postgraduate programs
Graduate certificates
Willmington School of the Bible
High school programs
The Value of a College Degree
Many people ask themselves this question: “Should I get a college degree online?” According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the median weekly earnings for people with a bachelor’s degree or higher is almost double that of someone with only a high school diploma.* Just this fact alone can attest to the value of a college degree. Add to that networking and personal growth opportunities, and the answer is “Yes!”
Benefits of a College Degree
Higher earnings
Personal development
The ability to network
If you’re looking for an online degree, then you probably have also asked yourself this question: “Do employers respect degrees earned online?”
There are many factors that go into answering this question. First, is your degree from an established college or university? When choosing a university, it is important that you find a school that has been accredited by either a regional or national agency. Generally, regional accreditation is more credible and valued. Since only accredited colleges or universities receive financial aid, you may find that your pocketbook will thank you as well.
If you’re looking for an online degree then you probably have also asked yourself this question: “Do employers respect degrees earned online?” There are many factors that go into answering this question. First, is your degree from a serious college or university? When choosing a university it is important that you find a school that has been accredited by either a regional or national agency. Generally, regional accreditation is more credible and valued. Since only accredited colleges or universities receive financial aid, you will find that your pocketbook will thank you as well.
61% of CEOs and small business owners are familiar with online programs
83% of executives say that an online degree is just as credible as campus-based programs
75% more lifetime earnings than people who only have a high school diploma*
When it comes to choosing a college, you should take into account the type of job you are looking for and whether an online degree fits the job.
For example, you can get a degree in aviation, but without the required flight hours, you cannot get your pilot’s license. That is why Liberty University has Flight Affiliates throughout the nation that allow you to get the required flight time while progressing towards graduation. Many of our degrees also have intensives so that you can get face-to-face time with your professors and the chance to network with peers.
The fact that Liberty University has an established reputation as an accredited online college and a growing residential campus can also lend credibility to your degree. According to a poll done by Excelsior College and Zogby International, 61% of CEOs and small business owners are familiar with online programs. Of that, 83% of executives in the survey say that an online degree is as credible as one earned through a traditional campus-based program. The same can be said of a survey conducted over the last two years by BestColleges.com. The majority of employers responded that online learning is “better than” or “equal to” on-campus learning.** 
These factors, as well as your reasons for getting a degree, could weigh heavily in your online college degree being taken seriously. Think about your choice for a degree and what it means for your future. Employers want not only a reputable degree — they want a qualified employee. Liberty University is an excellent place to earn a respected degree while becoming a principled, driven professional.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, The Economics Daily, More education still means more pay in 2014 on the Internet at https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2015/more-education-still-means-more-pay-in-2014.htm (visited July 15, 2019).
**BestColleges.com, 2019 Online Education Trends Report, on the Internet at https://www.bestcolleges.com/perspectives/annual-trends-in-online-education/ (visited July 15, 2019).
Liberty University Is One of the Nation’s Leading Accredited Online Colleges
Liberty University has been Training Champions for Christ since 1971, first on its stunning campus in Lynchburg, Virginia and then around the world through its online degree programs. Dedicated to developing Christ-centered men and women with the values, knowledge, and skills essential for impacting tomorrow’s world, Liberty offers you academic excellence with integrity.
Choose from 600+ undergraduate and graduate certificate, associate, bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral programs in many sought-after specializations – including business, criminal justice, education, nursing, counseling, and more – and prepare to make the difference you always knew you could.
Liberty has been a leader in distance education for over 30 years, and our decades of experience have taught us how to streamline your education so you can focus on what really matters to you.
Your online college degree through Liberty University is designed to complement your schedule, put your life experience or on-the-job training to work for you, and help move you forward — not hold you back — financially.
Our online college degree programs are taught in a flexible virtual classroom environment, allowing you to complete assignments when it’s most convenient for you. Most classes are 100% online, 8 weeks long, and have no set login times. With 8 start dates per year, you’re sure to find an online college degree that fits into your schedule. 
Our faculty members aren’t just leaders in their industries — they’re also professionals committed to mentorship. You can benefit from coursework that is both challenging and engaging while studying under Christian professors who teach from a biblical worldview — which isn’t something many online colleges offer. 
Here, you’re a person, not a number. Your success — in class, in faith, and in life — is our calling. 
Going back to school shouldn’t mean putting the important people, plans, and responsibilities in your life on hold. Wherever you are, we’re here to help you get the education you want without taking all the time you need for other priorities. See how an online degree from Liberty University can give you the skills and knowledge you need to shape a better world.
Our Online College Degrees Offer Prestigious Credentials and Great Benefits 
Starting a college degree online does not mean you have to sacrifice quality for flexibility. Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) to award associate, bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degrees. Additionally, many of Liberty’s online programs hold specialized accreditation or are otherwise recognized by prestigious professional and licensing agencies — thus supporting the value of your college degree.
Check out some of the specialized accreditations we’ve received:
Liberty’s School of Business is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP).
Our online PhD in Counselor Education and Supervision, MA in Clinical Mental Health Counseling, and MEd in School Counseling programs are accredited by the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP).
The John W. Rawlings School of Divinity has been accredited through the Commission on Accrediting of the Association of Theological Schools (ATS).
All of our School of Education initial and advanced licensure programs are accredited by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the postgraduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.ccneaccreditation.org).
Our MPH program is accredited by the Council on Education for Public Health (CEPH).
Liberty University’s BS in Respiratory Therapy online program holds Provisional Accreditation from the Commission on Accreditation for Respiratory Care (CoARC).
Liberty’s BS in Social Work degree program is accredited by the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE).
Liberty University is an accredited institutional member of the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
Our MS in Sports Management is accredited by the Commission on Sport Management Accreditation (COSMA).
Enrolling in one of our online college programs also means you can earn your degree from a nonprofit university whose online programs are widely recognized for academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. A degree at Liberty can enhance your ability to impact the world and help you stand out to hiring managers.
Earning a credible online college degree does not have to cost a fortune. In fact, tuition for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs has not increased in 8 years — and counting. While many other online colleges have raised tuition, Liberty has been able to keep costs low as a nonprofit university.
Contact Us Today to Begin Earning Your Online College Degree! 
If you are interested in earning your college degree online, consider becoming a Liberty student. Going back to school is a big step, but you don’t have to take it alone. We’ll walk with you through every step of admission, enrollment, and financial aid. Contact an admissions specialist who can help you create a plan for your educational success. We invite you to earn your college degree online and experience the difference Liberty has to offer.
Contact us via email, chat, or phone and start pursuing your goals!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/center-for-research-scholarship/qep-overview/","UG Research Curriculum
Student Learning Outcomes (SLO)
SLO1: Demonstrate the ability to articulate the value of research and a basic understanding of the role of research and scholarship in the life of a university student.
SLO2: Develop the knowledge and skills required to engage in research and scholarship.
SLO3: Design a research proposal/project that is discipline-specific.
Curricular Actions
In order to accomplish these learning outcomes, students in the undergraduate residential academic experience will build knowledge, values, and skills in research and scholarship through a scaffolding curriculum, which includes the following courses:
Through the Inquiry 101 course, freshmen and transfer students will gain an understanding of the value of research and the role of research and scholarship in the life of a university student.
Through the Research 201 course, sophomores and transfer students will develop the knowledge and skills required to engage in research and scholarship across the humanities, sciences, and creative arts.
This research training experience will culminate in opportunities to take program-specific Research intensives (PDF) in which upper-level classmen will design a research proposal or project that is discipline-specific.
The RSD Framework/Rubric (PDF) acts as a guideline for the research-intensive course content and as a measure of success of student achievement in designing a research project or proposal. Student acquisition of SLO #3 will be measured by the following rubrics based on the RSD framework."
"https://www.liberty.edu/behavioral-sciences/","Get a Degree in Behavioral Sciences from a Christian University
Prepare to lead the way as you impact lives in the behavioral sciences field. The School of Behavioral Sciences at Liberty University approaches the study of human behavior by integrating scientific research, social practice, and the Christian faith. Here, we’ll help you develop the soft skills and gain the credentials you’ll need for success in this rapidly growing career field. 
Choose from degree programs in Counseling, Psychology, and Social Work all taught from a Christian worldview.
Learn from experienced professors who are grounded in their faith and who share your passion for impacting lives and helping others.
View Testimonials
Ready for a Successful Career in the Behavioral Sciences?
Psychology
Choose a degree in the helping professions where you can contribute to the mental, spiritual, and behavioral needs of others. Offering a Human Services degree and Psychology degrees with multiple concentrations to match your passion.
Psychology – Home
Degree Program – Psychology
Social Work
Get equipped with the tools to succeed and the conviction to make a difference. Graduates with a Social Work degree work to improve communities and organizations, helping people build better lives.
Social Work – Home
Degree Program – Social Work"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/","Study Arts & Sciences at a Christian University
Prepare to Lead the Way
Liberty University’s College of Arts & Sciences offers a wide variety of degrees that will give you the personalized educational experience you’re looking for.
Confidently pursue your associate, bachelor’s, or master’s degree along with minors in our Arts & Sciences programs. These will help to equip you for success in many different types of career fields.
Get the quality Christian education you seek from experienced professors who are strong in their faith. Each of our departments offers a faith-integrated education giving you a degree that not only prepares you for your vocation but prepares you for life.
View Testimonials
Learn More About Our College of Arts & Sciences
Arts & Sciences Departments
ROTC (Army)
Learn how to lead and find out what it takes to be an Army officer. Get the military experience you’re looking for with your college education.
ROTC (Army) – Home
ROTC (Air Force)
Gain the military experience you need to prepare for your career. Learn leadership principles, and find out what it takes to be an Air Force officer.
ROTC (Air Force) – Home"
"https://www.liberty.edu/casas/academic-success-center/tutoring/","Tutoring Services
Tutoring Services for Residential Undergraduate Students
Let us help you excel in your academic pursuits with Liberty University’s tutoring. Our trained peer tutors offer you one-on-one and group tutoring during the fall and spring semesters at no additional cost if you are a Liberty University residential undergraduate student. Tutoring appointments are available for over 100 courses. See our course list for tutoring. Get equipped to do your best academically by actively engaging in the learning process through either individualized assistance or our safe group environments. Learn more about scheduling your appointment.
Find What You Need with Tutoring Services
Types of Tutoring Offered
One-on-One Tutoring
Receive individualized help from your tutor regarding any course content you want to learn, discuss, or review.
Group Tutoring
Group tutoring is offered for certain courses and provides a safe atmosphere for you to learn alongside your classmates.
Schedule Your Appointment
Review the information below before booking your appointment. See our scheduling videos below. See our tutoring course list and meet our peer tutors
Scheduling Guidelines
You must be enrolled in the course for which you are requesting tutoring
You are not permitted to ask tutors to complete your homework, quizzes, or tests
Multiple appointment requests submitted within a short time frame are subject to review for approval
There is a 24-hour cancellation policy for appointments 
Instructions for canceling an appointment (PDF)
If you are in need of a virtual appointment, please email tutoring@liberty.edu for more information.
Instructional Videos
How to Prepare for Your Appointment
Come to your appointment having attempted to complete the following actions:
Take detailed notes in class 
Start your homework before your appointment
Bring your textbook & class resources
Come with questions in mind
Join Our Student Tutoring Team
Tutoring Services offers paid and CSER tutor positions for residential undergraduate students. Applicants must have a cumulative LU GPA of at least 3.0, an A or B in the class you would be tutoring, and a desire to help students with their academic excellence. Contact: tutoring@liberty.edu
Work Study & Work Assistant (Paid Positions)
Work 12-16 hours per week
Consistent weekly schedule based on your availability
Apply through Human Resources 
CSER Christian Service (Volunteer Positions)
Work 2 hours per week for a total of 20-30 hours per semester
Consistent weekly schedule based on your availability
Apply through CSER
What Students Are Saying
""I got answers to questions I have had from four weeks of course material and I finally understood how to work an essential part of chemistry during this tutoring session.""
""My tutor was incredibly helpful in walking me through course content and helping me understand concepts.""
""I do not think I would have done as well as I did on anything without tutoring...I am so thankful and blessed to have this service!""
""Going to tutoring was super helpful to maintain and improve my grades. My tutors were incredibly helpful and knowledgeable of the material.""
“Some concepts I have struggled understanding for weeks were made clear in a matter of minutes.”
""My tutor was always knowledgeable about the subject and helped me work through difficult questions.""
Faculty Information
Supporting our faculty is key to our mission. Faculty members, reach out if you:
Need to request tutoring for your course(s)
Have a student you would like to recommend for our hiring process
Would like a tutor to visit your class for a brief introduction
Would like to provide additional resources for the tutor of your class
Contact us at: tutoring@liberty.edu
Connect With Us
Reach out to our team with questions, and get connected to the resources we offer. Contact: tutoring@liberty.edu
Abigail Coleman
Assistant Director of Residential Tutoring Services"
"https://www.liberty.edu/aeronautics/","Aviation Training at a Christian University
Prepare for success in the field of aeronautics with a degree from Liberty University. As one of the largest faith-based collegiate aviation programs in North America, our School of Aeronautics will train you with the skills to lead in the aviation field.
Become a pilot or an unmanned aerial systems operator through our residential B.S. in Aeronautics. Or, as an online student, get a B.S. in Aviation degree through our Flight Training Affiliate program. Both degrees are FAA approved for the 1000-hour Restricted Air Transport Pilot program.
Learn how to lead in the aviation maintenance industry through the B.S. in Aviation Maintenance with Management and Unmanned Aerial System Cognates. The maintenance program includes a 12-month accelerated certificate course that will prepare you for FAA Airframe and Powerplant mechanic licensure.
View bachelor’s degrees
Experienced faculty who are grounded in their faith will help you develop the skills you need for leadership and success in whatever field you choose.
Or, get a B.S. in Aviation Administration and prepare for an exciting career in airport management, airline operations, aviation business or government, and a host of other professions in the aerospace industry.
Safety is Our Number One Priority
Our safety reporting system is available to both students and instructors. It offers the ability to report anything you witness or experience that may be inconsistent with our safety standards, whether it be in flight, during ground operations or an observation on the airport ramp. You can choose to remain anonymous during the completion of the form. The more information you can provide about the issue, the better we can help to address it.
Loening Trophy: 2017, 2018 and 2019 winner of the prestigious Loening Trophy awarded to the outstanding all-around collegiate aviation program in the United States.
American Airlines Safety Award: 2016, 2017, and 2018 winner of the American Airlines Safety Award.
Prepare for Success in Your Future Career
See how our students and alumni are performing in the classroom and in their careers.
View Our Student Achievement Data
Bachelor of Science in Aeronautics (B.S.) – Commercial/Corporate Concentration and Global Studies Concentration
Bachelor of Science in Aeronautics (B.S.) – Military Cognate
Bachelor of Science in Unmanned Aircraft Operations (B.S.)
Bachelor of Science in Aviation Administration (B.S.) – Aviation Safety Management Cognate and Flight Cognate
Bachelor of Science in Aviation Maintenance (B.S.) – Management Cognate and Unmanned Aerial Systems Cognate
Programs"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/","School of Business
Lead. Make an Impact.
~
Training Leaders to be Champions for Christ
Get Your Business Degree from a Christian University
Gain the skills employers are looking for with a residential or online degree from the School of Business at Liberty University. Here, you’ll be taught from a Christian perspective, building the kind of ethics, character, and integrity that makes a difference in the marketplace.
Get your associate, bachelor’s, master’s, or doctorate degree in the field of business. With more than 90 areas of study, Liberty’s School of Business gives you the opportunity to customize your degree so it meets your unique interests. Get a head start on your master’s degree by qualifying for one of our 3 + 1 business degrees where you can earn both your undergraduate and graduate degrees in just four years.
Learn from a dynamic network of Christian faculty who bring decades of real-world experience into the classroom giving you the type of practical knowledge you’ll need in your career. From here, you can take the opportunity to apply your skills in a business internship or one of our innovative centers.
Our Top Business Degree Programs
Featured Business Faculty
Professor Miranda Dyer
Assistant Professor
Dr. David Holder
Associate Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Stacie Rhodes
Associate Dean
Associate Dean, Accreditation, Curriculum, Assessment
View Bio 
Professor Michael Floyd
Online Chair
View Bio 
Professor Richard Bansley
Executive Director for the Center of Cyber Excellence
View Bio 
Dr. Nicole Lowes
Director of Methodology- Doctoral Programs
View Bio 
Professor Miranda Dyer
Assistant Professor
Dr. David Holder
Associate Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Stacie Rhodes
Associate Dean
Associate Dean, Accreditation, Curriculum, Assessment
View Bio 
Professor Michael Floyd
Online Chair
View Bio 
Professor Richard Bansley
Executive Director for the Center of Cyber Excellence
View Bio 
Dr. Nicole Lowes
Director of Methodology- Doctoral Programs
View Bio 
Professor Miranda Dyer
Assistant Professor
Dr. David Holder
Associate Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Stacie Rhodes
Associate Dean
Associate Dean, Accreditation, Curriculum, Assessment
View Bio 
Professor Michael Floyd
Online Chair
View Bio 
Professor Richard Bansley
Executive Director for the Center of Cyber Excellence
View Bio 
Dr. Nicole Lowes
Director of Methodology- Doctoral Programs
View Bio 
Professor Miranda Dyer
Assistant Professor
Sharpen your Skills in Liberty’s School of Business Building
Liberty’s 78,000-square-foot School of Business building offers state-of-the-art facilities such 
as information technology labs, a networking data center, and a simulated stock trading room. 
The stock trading room is equipped with a stock ticker and New York Stock Exchange display boards. 
The School of Business is also home for the Center for Entrepreneurship, the Center for Cyber Excellence, and the Center for Financial Literacy.
School of Business Facts & Figures
27
Average residential-class size
73
Residential programs, including cognates
95%
Residential full-time undergrad students accepted financial aid
82%
CFP pass rate for residential undergrad (higher than national avg.)
70%-30%
Residential male students to residential female students
Get What It Takes for Success in Your Field
Apply your skills through hands-on opportunities in one of our innovative centers:
What Business Alumni are Saying
""I’m so thankful for the support of my professors and the faculty.""
""Liberty taught me to find a way to add value wherever I go, to connect with people and foster relationships, and to be helpful beyond the stated ask. That is what I was told would take me further, and it has proven to be true.""
""Liberty developed and encouraged a strong Christian foundation in each of us, which we took into the business world. We try to put God first and honor Him in the way we do business, and I think that is why our businesses have been blessed.""
""I am so grateful for my time at Liberty. It really changed my life in so many positive ways…""
""I think people locally will be really amazed with the talent they see come out of Liberty and how its rising entrepreneurs can be a strong source of job creation over time.""
Target Your Area of Interest with Our Specialized Programs
Computer Technology Programs
Choose from multiple disciplines in this quickly growing field
Hospitality & Sport Management
Launch your career in some of the world’s leading industries
Liberty School of Business in the News
Accreditation for the School of Business
The School of Business has several programs that are accredited by ACBSP or are pursuing accreditation. ACBSP is a specialized accreditation for business-related programs. 
This is in addition to other program-specific accreditation and Liberty University’s institutional accreditation.
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) to award associate, bachelor’s, master’s, specialist, and doctoral degrees. For questions about the accreditation of Liberty University, please contact: Commission on Colleges 1866 Southern Ln. Decatur, GA 30033-4097 (404) 679-4500. 
Inquiries about the institution itself, such as admission requirements, financial aid, educational programs, etc., should be addressed directly to Liberty University."
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/","School of Education
Answering the Call
~
Training Educators to be Champions for Christ
Get Your Education Degree from a Christian University
Fulfill your calling in the field of education with your associate, bachelor’s, master’s, postgraduate, or doctoral degree from the School of Education at Liberty University.
Here, you’ll receive a world-class Christian education based on the principles of God’s Word.
Study in flexible on-campus or online formats, including your choice of licensure or non-licensure programs.
Let us help prepare you for a career in teaching, school administration, curriculum development, higher education administration, and more.
Learn from programs of study and pre-service experiences that will foster excellence in Christian, public, and private schools.
Study under skilled faculty members who possess a broad base of experience and their own personal calling to the field of education.
What Employers Are Saying
Our Top Education Degree Programs
Featured Education Faculty
Dr. Samuel Smith
Director of Advanced Licensure Programs
Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Michelle Goodwin
Associate Dean for Licensure and Residential Programs
View Bio 
Yoon Patti
Assistant Director of Online Field Placement 
Dr. Anita Satterlee
Administrative Chair of Research and Doctoral Programs
View Bio 
Dr. Samuel Smith
Director of Advanced Licensure Programs
Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Michelle Goodwin
Associate Dean for Licensure and Residential Programs
View Bio 
Yoon Patti
Assistant Director of Online Field Placement 
Dr. Anita Satterlee
Administrative Chair of Research and Doctoral Programs
View Bio 
Dr. Samuel Smith
Director of Advanced Licensure Programs
Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Michelle Goodwin
Associate Dean for Licensure and Residential Programs
View Bio 
Yoon Patti
Assistant Director of Online Field Placement 
Dr. Anita Satterlee
Administrative Chair of Research and Doctoral Programs
View Bio 
Dr. Samuel Smith
Director of Advanced Licensure Programs
Professor
View Bio 
Curriculum Library
An extensive Curriculum Library is housed in the Jerry Falwell Library on the terrace level. These materials give School of Education students access to a variety of PreK-12 instructional resources and juvenile literature, including:
Children’s and young adult fiction and nonfiction
Teacher edition textbooks
Teaching materials
Educational games, manipulatives, and models
School of Education Facts & Figures
14
Average residential class size
25
Residential programs – including cognates
97%
Residential, full-time undergrad students accepted financial aid
15+
Approved study abroad programs
6%-94%
Percentage of residential male students to female students 
Student & Professional Organizations
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development Student Chapter
Autism Speaks U
Council for Exceptional Children
Kappa Delta Pi 
Pi Sigma (Local Chapter) – Undergraduates
Pi Sigma (Professional Chapter) – Graduates
Professional Association of Christian Educators (PACE)
American Society for Engineering Education
Association for Middle-Level Education
What Education Alumni are Saying
What sets Liberty apart is that the professors are here to help guide you to fulfilling your calling. Not only are the professors in the School of Education knowledgeable in their subject matter, but they are personally invested in your life to foreword your calling. The professional relationships formed during my undergraduate degree gave me a wealth of wisdom in beginning my career.
B.S. Social Studies Teacher Licensure
My training at Liberty University has given me a greater understanding about teaching well. The greatest takeaways are differentiated instruction and small groups in the classroom. Having a strong biblical worldview is key to being a strong Christian teacher. I am also thankful for the practicum placement which helps give practical application of the material as well as a potential job opportunity.
B.S. Elementary Education
The biggest thing that I was prepared for within the School of Education was the ability to be able to love students regardless of where they come from. I was only able to do this because of the wonderful people that I surrounded myself with at Liberty University. Thank you to all of the faculty and staff that made such an important impact on me while I was a student so that I can impact my students.
Having a high-quality Christian education prepared me well. The educational theories I learned, and my classroom experience gave me a lot of confidence in my teaching. Stepping into a classroom where the primary language is not English is intimidating, but knowing that I am well-equipped gave me self-confidence.
B.S. in Special Education Interdisciplinary Studies
My degree from Liberty University has impacted my life in countless ways. Most importantly, due to taking online classes, I am working my dream job (a job I found during my practicums) in a school where student-centered learning is a priority, and I am able to actively support my students' growth in academics and in God.
B.Ed. in Special Education
Liberty School of Education in the News
Students present research projects at Harvard University conference 
A group of 10 Liberty University undergraduate students presented research at the National Collegiate Research Conference (NCRC) at Harvard University on Jan. 20-22, the largest student-run research conference in America. They joined more than 500 students from over 100 universities… 
January 27, 2023
Accreditation for the School of Education
The Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP) accredits Liberty University. CAEP promotes excellence in educator preparation through content and pedagogy, clinical partnerships and practice, candidate recruitment, progression and support, program impact, and quality assurance and continuous improvement. 
Liberty University meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation.
See CAEP Annual Reporting Measures
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) to award associate, bachelor’s, master’s, specialist, and doctoral degrees. For questions about the accreditation of Liberty University, please contact: Commission on Colleges 1866 Southern Ln. Decatur, GA 30033-4097 (404) 679-4500. 
Inquiries about the institution itself, such as admission requirements, financial aid, educational programs, etc., should be addressed directly to Liberty University."
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/","Christian. Conservative. Committed to Your Success.
What You’re Looking For in a School of Government
Rise to the challenge and prepare for your career through an associate, bachelor’s, master’s, or doctoral degree from the Helms School of Government.
Select from our programs in Criminal Justice, Government, Public Policy, Homeland Security, International Relations, Pre-Law, Public Policy, or Public Administration and then tailor your choice to match your career goals.
Our variety of minors and certificates will also help you target your interests.
Learn from professors who have not only held esteemed positions in the field of government but are also grounded in the Christian faith.
With professional knowledge and expertise, our faculty members are committed to helping you succeed both as a student and as a leader in your field.
Government Testimonials
“The Helms School of Government professors are experts in their fields, with both academic and professional credentials. They not only prepared me for my field of study but equipped me to thrive in my career. My degree was not just an academic process – it was a journey toward excellence in service to God and country.”
– Capt. Jayson Warren, USAF Airborne Intelligence Officer (Government degree)
The faculty at the Helms School of Government are some of the most well-trained, passionate, and caring individuals that I have had the privilege of knowing. They prepared me academically and taught me the practical skills I needed for a successful career in law enforcement.”
– Christian G. Smith (Criminal Justice degree)
“The Helms School of Government was instrumental in developing my critical thinking skills. I was challenged in my own assumptions and learned to think systematically and consistently.”
– Josh Hetzler (Government degree)
“By learning to brief cases, I’m able to recognize key rules and rationale from a court case. This has been invaluable for my time in law school as I came in with skills that most others had to acquire during the first few weeks of school.”
– Karsyn Keener (Government degree)
“The foundation that I developed from my coursework, extracurricular activities, and opportunities in the Helms School of Government proved invaluable as I began my career on Capitol Hill. Without a solid footing in my worldview, I would not have been as firm in my principles as I am today.”
– Montgomery Pace (International Relations degree)
“The Helms School of Government professors are experts in their fields, with both academic and professional credentials. They not only prepared me for my field of study but equipped me to thrive in my career. My degree was not just an academic process – it was a journey toward excellence in service to God and country.”
– Capt. Jayson Warren, USAF Airborne Intelligence Officer (Government degree)
The faculty at the Helms School of Government are some of the most well-trained, passionate, and caring individuals that I have had the privilege of knowing. They prepared me academically and taught me the practical skills I needed for a successful career in law enforcement.”
– Christian G. Smith (Criminal Justice degree)
“The Helms School of Government was instrumental in developing my critical thinking skills. I was challenged in my own assumptions and learned to think systematically and consistently.”
– Josh Hetzler (Government degree)
“By learning to brief cases, I’m able to recognize key rules and rationale from a court case. This has been invaluable for my time in law school as I came in with skills that most others had to acquire during the first few weeks of school.”
– Karsyn Keener (Government degree)
“The foundation that I developed from my coursework, extracurricular activities, and opportunities in the Helms School of Government proved invaluable as I began my career on Capitol Hill. Without a solid footing in my worldview, I would not have been as firm in my principles as I am today.”
– Montgomery Pace (International Relations degree)
“The Helms School of Government professors are experts in their fields, with both academic and professional credentials. They not only prepared me for my field of study but equipped me to thrive in my career. My degree was not just an academic process – it was a journey toward excellence in service to God and country.”
– Capt. Jayson Warren, USAF Airborne Intelligence Officer (Government degree)
Start Your Journey Here at the Helms School of Government
Featured Degrees
Featured Programs"
"https://www.liberty.edu/engineering/","School of Engineering
Learn. Discover. Lead.
~
Training Engineers to be Champions for Christ
Earn Your Degree from a Christian Engineering School
Live on the cutting edge of innovation as you pursue your Engineering Degree at Liberty University. Get more than just a degree in this in-demand industry with hands-on learning and state-of-the-art equipment.
Connect with world-class faculty who share your passion for improving society’s quality of life. Committed to excellence, the School of Engineering is raising the next generation of Christian intellectuals as Champions for Christ to redeem, restore, and renew this culture.
Graduate a leader in your field, and join our alumni who are also using their values, knowledge, and skills to impact tomorrow’s technologies.
Our Top Engineering Degree Programs
Get Complete Degree Listings
Creationeering – Our Vision for Engineering Education and Research
Engineering is the creation of new technology and processes and, to be effective, it must follow a certain cycle that includes design, analysis, and sustainability. These steps also relate to the fundamental features of a successful business.
Liberty’s School of Engineering follows a model of creationeering – where these two domains meet and society benefits from the results.
“Science is the discovery of what is; engineering is the creation of what never was.”
– Theodore von Kármán (20th Century Aerospace Engineer)
Meet Your Dean
Mark Horstemeyer
Dean, School of Engineering
“We are raising the next generation of intellectuals, Training Champions for Christ, to redeem and restore this culture.”
– Mark Horstemeyer, Dean
Featured Engineering Faculty
Dr. Mark Atwater
Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Thomas Eldredge
Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Tate Fonville
Assistant Professor Mechanical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Kyung K. Bae
Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Hector Medina
Professor of Mechanical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Carl Pettiford
Associate Dean
View Bio 
Dr. Diana Schwerha
Chair of Computer, Electrical, and Industrial & Systems Engineering
Professor of Industrial & Systems Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Mark Atwater
Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Thomas Eldredge
Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Tate Fonville
Assistant Professor Mechanical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Kyung K. Bae
Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Hector Medina
Professor of Mechanical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Carl Pettiford
Associate Dean
View Bio 
Dr. Diana Schwerha
Chair of Computer, Electrical, and Industrial & Systems Engineering
Professor of Industrial & Systems Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Mark Atwater
Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Thomas Eldredge
Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Tate Fonville
Assistant Professor Mechanical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Kyung K. Bae
Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Hector Medina
Professor of Mechanical Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Carl Pettiford
Associate Dean
View Bio 
Dr. Diana Schwerha
Chair of Computer, Electrical, and Industrial & Systems Engineering
Professor of Industrial & Systems Engineering
View Bio 
Dr. Mark Atwater
Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
matwater1@liberty.edu
View Bio 
School of Engineering Facts & Figures
17
Average residential-class size
12
programs offered at the undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral level
96%
graduates employed in field or related field of study
100%
pass rate for Principles and Practice of Engineering (PE) Exam
583
Total residential enrollment
Center for Engineering Research & Education (CERE)
Uniting industry and academics, our industry-sponsored labs provide a working platform for applied engineering research and higher education. By participating in CERE, you will conduct research in the field and help solve the energy needs of the future.
What Engineering Alumni are Saying
Liberty taught me that my faith could fuel my excellence in engineering. The engineering faculty challenged me to aim higher and, through their teaching excellence, equipped me to do my very best.
The Industrial and Systems Engineering (ISE) major is preparing me in a wonderful way to affirm and promote a biblical worldview as I enter the world of business and engineering full-time.
Being a mechanical engineering student at Liberty prepared me to not only get the job I wanted when I graduated but also excel at it.
My experience studying computer engineering has been wonderful. All the faculty, professors, and students are extremely supportive.
Liberty School of Engineering in the News
Competition Teams & Clubs
Get hands-on opportunities with real engineering projects in one of our unique competition teams and clubs like:
Liberty Motorsports Baja SAE
ASCE Concrete Canoe
Liberty Rocketry
Robotics
Accreditation for the School of Engineering
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) to award associate, bachelor’s, master’s, specialist, and doctoral degrees. For questions about the accreditation of Liberty University, please contact: Commission on Colleges 1866 Southern Ln. Decatur, GA 30033-4097 (404) 679-4500. 
Inquiries about the institution itself, such as admission requirements, financial aid, educational programs, etc., should be addressed directly to Liberty University."
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/","Get a Degree in the Health Sciences at a Christian University 
Liberty University’s School of Health Sciences (SHS) strives to provide a world-class academic experience through an engaging, diverse, and innovative Christian environment steeped in a Biblical worldview. Through an exceptional educational experience, rigorous academic scholarship, and a Christ-centered community, the SHS prepares graduates to become influential professionals in their respective fields. Through this holistic approach we endeavor to equip men and women to impact the world for Christ.
The School of Health Sciences consists of three departments:
Biology & Chemistry
Allied Health Professions
Public & Community Health
Departments and programs are certified and accredited by discipline-specific bodies.
We Can Help You Achieve Your Goals
Learn More About Our Health Sciences Programs
Health Sciences Departments"
"https://www.liberty.edu/about/institutional-and-program-accreditation/","Accreditation
Institutional Accreditation
SACSCOC – Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) to award associate, bachelor’s, master’s, educational specialist, and doctorate degrees, as well as certificates at approved degree levels. Questions about the accreditation of Liberty University may be directed in writing to the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges at 1866 Southern Lane, Decatur, GA 30033-4097, by calling (404) 679-4500, or by using information available on SACSCOC’s website (www.sacscoc.org).
Institutional accreditation ensures that Liberty University has met strict standards with regard to educational programs, faculty, administration, academic and student support, and financial and physical resources. Accreditation also ensures that Liberty’s courses and degrees will be accepted by institutions recognized by the U.S. Department of Education.
As an accredited institution, Liberty University is eligible to participate in federal educational programs such as military tuition assistance, government tuition reimbursement programs, the GI Bill®, and corporate tuition assistance. Credits and degrees earned through Liberty are therefore recognized by private industry and by the federal government for promotion, assignment, and position qualification standards.
As an accredited institution, Liberty University is eligible to participate in federal educational programs such as military tuition assistance, government tuition reimbursement programs, the GI Bill®, and corporate tuition assistance. Credits and degrees earned through Liberty are therefore recognized by private industry and by the federal government for promotion, assignment, and position qualification standards.
*GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill.
Program Accreditation
In addition to our institutional accreditation, many of Liberty’s programs are accredited or otherwise recognized by specialized professional and accrediting agencies:
Aeronautics
Liberty University School of Aeronautics has five residential programs accredited by Aviation Accreditation Board International (AABI) during the period July 16, 2021 to July 31, 2026.
B.S. in Aeronautics – Commercial/Corporate Concentration and Global Studies Concentration (AABI Flight Education)
B.S. in Aeronautics – Military Cognate (AABI Aviation Studies)
B.S. in Unmanned Aircraft Operations (AABI Unmanned Aircraft Systems)
B.S. in Aviation Administration (AABI Aviation Management)
B.S. in Aviation Maintenance (AABI Aviation Maintenance-B.S.)
AABI Accreditation encompasses only the residential programs listed above.
Aviation Accreditation Board International
115 S. 8th Street, Suite 102
Opelika, AL 36801
(334) 748-9359
Athletic Training
Liberty’s Athletic Training program is accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Athletic Training Education (CAATE).
2201 Double Creek Drive
Suite 5006
Round Rock, TX 78664
(512) 733-9700
Business
Liberty’s School of Business is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Programs that have achieved accredited status include:
A.A. in Accounting
A.A. in Business
A.A. in Information Systems
B.S. in Accounting and Data Analysis
B.S. in Business Administration and Data Analysis – cognates as listed at https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/
B.S. in Information Systems
M.S. in Accounting
Master of Business Administration – cognates as listed at https://www.liberty.edu/business/masters/
ACBSP accreditation encompasses both resident and distance learning programs, as applicable.
11520 West 119th Street
Overland Park, KS 66213
(913) 339-9356
Computer Science
Liberty’s B.S. in Computer Science is accredited by the Computing Accreditation Commission of ABET, https://www.abet.org/:
ABET
415 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
(410) 347-7700
(410) 625-2238 (Fax)
Counseling
Liberty’s residential Ph.D. in Counselor Education and Supervision, M.A. Clinical Mental Health Counseling, and M.A. in Marriage and Family Counseling programs are accredited by the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP). Liberty’s online M.A. Clinical Mental Health Counseling and online M.Ed. in School Counseling programs are also accredited by CACREP.
1001 North Fairfax Street, Suite 510
Alexandria, VA 22314
(703) 535-5990
The M.Ed. in School Counseling program is also accredited by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation CAEP.
1140 19th St NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 223-0077
Divinity
The Liberty University John W. Rawlings School of Divinity is accredited by the Commission on Accrediting of the Association of Theological Schools (ATS). The following degree programs are approved by the Commission on Accrediting: Master of Divinity; Master of Arts in Christian Ministry (Professional MA); Master of Arts in Global Studies (Professional MA); Master of Arts in Religion (Professional MA); Master of Arts in Sports Chaplaincy (Professional MA); Master of Religious Education (Professional MA); Master of Arts (Biblical Exposition) (Academic MA); Master of Arts (Biblical Studies) (Academic MA); Master of Arts (Christian Apologetics) (Academic MA); Master of Arts (Theological Studies) (Academic MA); Doctor of Ministry (Advanced Professional); Doctor of Education (Advanced Professional); Master of Theology (Advanced Academic); and the Doctor of Philosophy (Theology and Apologetics) (Advanced Academic).
10 Summit Park Drive
Pittsburgh PA 15275-1110
Telephone: 412-788-6505
www.ats.edu
Education
The Liberty University School of Education is accredited by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation CAEP.
1140 19th St NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 223-0077
Liberty’s Teacher Licensure Program is approved by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE)
P.O. Box 2120
Richmond, VA 23218-2120
(804) 225-2023
Liberty’s Teacher Licensure Program is accredited by the Association of Christian Schools International (ACSI).
P.O. Box 65130
Colorado Springs, CO 80962-5130
(800) 367-0798
Engineering
Several of Liberty University’s programs are accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET, https://www.abet.org:
B.S. in Computer Engineering
B.S. in Electrical Engineering
B.S. in Industrial and Systems Engineering
B.S. in Mechanical Engineering
ABET
415 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
(410) 347-7700
(410) 625-2238 (Fax)
Exercise Science
Liberty’s Exercise Science program is accredited by the Commission for the Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP).
1361 Park Street
Clearwater, FL 33756
(727) 210-2350
Forensic Science
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Forensic Science residential program is accredited by Forensic Science Education Programs Accreditation Commission (FEPAC) of the American Academy of Forensic Sciences.
410 North 21st Street
Colorado Spring, CO 20901-0669
(719) 636-0669
Law
Liberty University School of Law is accredited by the Council of the Section of Legal Education and Admissions to the Bar of the American Bar Association (ABA).
321 North Clark St.
Chicago, IL 60654
(312) 988-5000
Music
Liberty University is an accredited institutional member of the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM). NASM accredits all music programs. The School of Music also offers two degrees that are not music degrees: the BS in Worship Studies and the Doctor of Worship Studies.
11250 Roger Bacon Drive, Suite 21
Reston, VA 20190-5248
(703) 437-0700
Nursing
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and post graduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE):
655 K Street, NW, Suite 750
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 887-6791
Liberty’s Registered Nurse program is approved by the Virginia Board of Nursing (VBN).
Perimeter Center
9960 Maryland Drive, Suite 300
Henrico, VA 23233-1463
(804) 367-4515
The Liberty University School of Nursing Simulation Center is accredited by the Society for Simulation in Healthcare (SSH) in the areas of Teaching/Education.
2021 L Street, NW
Suite 400
Washington, DC 20036
(866)730-6127
Osteopathic Medicine
Liberty University College of Osteopathic Medicine (LUCOM) is accredited by the Commission on Osteopathic College Accreditation (COCA), operating under authority granted to it by the U.S. Department of Education, to offer an academic program leading to the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (DO) degree. The degree is conferred by the Board of Trustees of the College on those candidates successfully completing the course of study and recommended by the College’s faculty.
The address and phone number of the accrediting agency are:
Secretary, Commission on Osteopathic College Accreditations
142 East Ontario Street
Chicago, IL 60611
Phone: 312-202-8097
Fax: 312-202-8397
Public Health
The Liberty University MPH program with concentrations in Health Promotion, Global Health, Nutrition, and Epidemiology as well as the Bachelor of Science in Public Health program are accredited by the Council on Education for Public Health (CEPH).
1010 Wayne Avenue, Suite 220
Silver Spring, MD 20910
(202) 789-1050
Respiratory Therapy
The B.S. Degree Entry into Respiratory Therapy Practice, CoARC program number 200640, B.S. in Respiratory Therapy, in Lynchburg, Virginia, program holds Provisional Accreditation from the Commission on Accreditation for Respiratory Care (www.coarc.com).
The B.S. Degree Advancement Program in Respiratory Care, CoARC program number 510013, B.S. in Respiratory Therapy online program holds Provisional Accreditation from the Commission on Accreditation for Respiratory Care (www.coarc.com).
This status signifies that a program with an Approval of Intent has demonstrated sufficient compliance with the Standards (through submission of an acceptable Provisional Accreditation Self Study Report (PSSR) and any other documentation required by the CoARC, as well as satisfactory completion of an initial on-site visit.
Commission on Accreditation for Respiratory Care (CoARC)
P. O. Box 54876
Hurst, Texas 76054-4876
(817) 283-2835
Social Work
Liberty’s B.S. in Social Work degree program, offered in both residential and distance education formats, is accredited by the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE).
1701 Duke Street, Suite 200
Alexandria, VA 22314
(703) 519-2078
Sport Management
The sport management degree program(s) at Liberty University has received specialized accreditation through the Commission on Sport Management Accreditation (COSMA) located in Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. The sport management programs in the following degrees are accredited by COSMA:
Bachelor of Science Sport Management (Residential) with cognates in Sport Administration, Sport Communication & Public Relations, Sport Outreach, Venue & Event Management, and General Studies
Master of Science in Sport Management (Residential and Online) with cognates in Sport Administration, Outdoor Adventure Sport, Tourism, and General Studies
Certification Board
Liberty University is authorized to confer degrees by the Commonwealth of Virginia.
SCHEV – State Council of Higher Education for Virginia
www.schev.edu/
James Monroe Building
101 North Fourteenth Street
Richmond, Virginia 23219
(804) 225-2600
Memberships
Liberty is a member of the following:
ACSI – Association of Christian Schools International
www.acsi.org/
P.O. Box 65130
Colorado Springs, CO 80962-5130
(800) 367-0798
CICV – Council of Independent Colleges in Virginia
http://www.cicv.org/
P. O. Box 1005
Bedford, VA 24523
(540) 586-0606
NCAA – The National Collegiate Athletic Association
www.ncaa.org/
700 W. Washington Street
P.O. Box 6222
Indianapolis, IN 46206-6222
(317) 917-6222"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/computer-science/general/","Residential General Computer Science Program
Advance your career with a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science degree with a General Cognate. You will train to solve complex problems using computer technology. Learn how to write and program software, create applications for mobile devices, and develop websites. With a B.S. in Computer Science, you’ll find out how to develop computing environments that facilitate interaction between people and their computers. You will do this by running computer programs and improving computer processes and performance.
As a generalist in computer sciences, you can focus your degree in areas like:
Data structure and algorithms
Information and database theory
Software engineering
Numerical analysis
Computational complexity theory
Computer graphics
Programming language theory
Cyber security and computer vision
Academics: General Cognate
Featured General Computer Science Courses
Programming in C++ Advanced (CSCN 112)
Data Structures and Algorithms using C++ (CSCN 215)
Database Design and Management (CSCN 326)
Operating Systems Design (CSCN 443)
Career Opportunities in Computer Science
Applications Software Developer
Systems Software Developer
Software Architect
Systems Architect
Software Engineer
Programmer
Cyber Security Architect"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/computer-science/software-engineering/","Residential Software Engineering Program
Acquire the skills you need to be the creative mind behind computer programs with our Software Engineering cognate. Whatever type of software application you are interested in developing, Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Computer Science – Software Engineering cognate will give you what you need to make a difference in your career.
Learn from experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith. And get hands-on practice with a variety of software engineering and development functions such as:
Designing, testing, and developing software to meet user needs
Recommending software upgrades for customers
Designing each piece of an application or system
Creating a variety of models and diagrams that show programmers the software code needed for an application
Ensuring that a program continues to function normally through software maintenance and testing
Documenting every aspect of an application or system as a reference for future maintenance and upgrades
Collaborating with other computer specialists to create optimal software
Academics: Software Engineering Cognate
Featured Software Engineering Courses
Programming in C++ Advanced (CSCN 112)
Data Structures and Algorithms using C++ (CSCN 215)
Computer Architecture (CSCN 342)
Programming Language Design and Compiler Theory (CSCN 434)
Career Opportunities in Software Engineering
Applications software engineers
Systems software engineers
Cyber Security Architect
Desktop Developer
Mobile Developer
DevOps Developer
Software Development Engineer in Test (SDET)
Embedded Developer
Security Developer
Graphics Developer
Game Developer
Data Scientist
Big Data Developer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/nursing/","School of Nursing
Where Art Meets Science
~
Positively Impacting Our World
Through the Art and Science of Nursing. 
A Christian Nursing Education
Choose a career in the highly marketable field of nursing and use your degree to impact individuals, communities, and nations. In the Liberty University School of Nursing (LUSON), you can get your bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral nursing degrees in residential and/or online formats. 
LUSON blends the art of caring with the expertise of science and research, giving you a holistic approach to the nursing field. Here, you’ll be taught how to care for your patients physically as well as tend to their mental, emotional, and spiritual needs.
Graduates are known for their clinical competence, strong work ethic, and heartfelt compassion. This is a reflection of Liberty’s commitment to instilling Christian virtues and a desire to serve in the life of every nursing student.
Learn from a credentialed and experienced staff who share your passion for the field of nursing and your love for Jesus Christ. And through our Simulation Center, fully accredited by the Society for Simulation in Healthcare, you’ll gain the confidence you need through simulation events with high fidelity simulators, standardized patients, and skill trainers.
Our Top Nursing Degree Programs
Get Hands-On Learning in Our Simulation Center
Actively participate in hands-on, high-fidelity simulation with the help of experienced faculty who are dedicated to increasing safety and competence in the clinical experience.
Featured Nursing Faculty
Dr. Jerry Harvey
Professor
BSN Program
View Bio 
Dr. Shade Odedina
Field Director, PMHNP/DNP Program
Associate Professor, DNP Program
View Bio 
Dr. Lisa Smith
Field Director, FNP Program
Associate Professor, DNP Program
View Bio 
Dr. Ken Thompson
Associate Professor
BSN, MSN, DNP Programs
View Bio 
Professor Michael Tricoli
Assistant Professor
BSN Program
View Bio 
Dr. Tracey M. Turner
Interim Dean, School of Nursing 
View Bio 
Dr. Sherri Walker
Director, PMHNP/DNP Program
Associate Professor, DNP Program
View Bio 
Dr. Dorothy Murphy
Associate Dean | Director, FNP/DNP Programs | Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Diane Bridge
Chair, Residential Pre-Licensure Programs | Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Sharon Kopis
Chair, DNP/APRN Programs | Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Elizabeth Whorley
Chair, Online Undergraduate & Graduate Nursing Programs | Associate Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Jerry Harvey
Professor
BSN Program
View Bio 
Dr. Shade Odedina
Field Director, PMHNP/DNP Program
Associate Professor, DNP Program
View Bio 
Dr. Lisa Smith
Field Director, FNP Program
Associate Professor, DNP Program
View Bio 
Dr. Ken Thompson
Associate Professor
BSN, MSN, DNP Programs
View Bio 
Professor Michael Tricoli
Assistant Professor
BSN Program
View Bio 
Dr. Tracey M. Turner
Interim Dean, School of Nursing 
View Bio 
Dr. Sherri Walker
Director, PMHNP/DNP Program
Associate Professor, DNP Program
View Bio 
Dr. Dorothy Murphy
Associate Dean | Director, FNP/DNP Programs | Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Diane Bridge
Chair, Residential Pre-Licensure Programs | Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Sharon Kopis
Chair, DNP/APRN Programs | Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Elizabeth Whorley
Chair, Online Undergraduate & Graduate Nursing Programs | Associate Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Jerry Harvey
Professor
BSN Program
View Bio 
Dr. Shade Odedina
Field Director, PMHNP/DNP Program
Associate Professor, DNP Program
View Bio 
Dr. Lisa Smith
Field Director, FNP Program
Associate Professor, DNP Program
View Bio 
Dr. Ken Thompson
Associate Professor
BSN, MSN, DNP Programs
View Bio 
Professor Michael Tricoli
Assistant Professor
BSN Program
View Bio 
Dr. Tracey M. Turner
Interim Dean, School of Nursing 
View Bio 
Dr. Sherri Walker
Director, PMHNP/DNP Program
Associate Professor, DNP Program
View Bio 
Dr. Dorothy Murphy
Associate Dean | Director, FNP/DNP Programs | Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Diane Bridge
Chair, Residential Pre-Licensure Programs | Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Sharon Kopis
Chair, DNP/APRN Programs | Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Elizabeth Whorley
Chair, Online Undergraduate & Graduate Nursing Programs | Associate Professor
View Bio 
Dr. Jerry Harvey
Professor
BSN Program
View Bio 
School of Nursing Facts & Figures
8:1
Clinical group average class size
100%
FNP pass rate for the last 5 years
600
BSN program offers 600 clinical hours while Virginia only requires 500
94%
NCLEX-RN pass rate compared to the national level of 86.57% in 2020
90%
Retention rate for residential students academic year 2021
School of Nursing Events
Get up-to-date information on LUSON latest events like:
Student Meet & Greets
Nursing Career & Graduate School Fairs
Nursing Doctoral & Graduate Studies Open House
Interprofessional Education (IPE) Events 
High School Nurse Camp
Nursing Alumni
Serving others, creating change, and improving the healthcare of our nation, LUSON alumni are practicing nursing with confident, competent, and compassionate care.
Our alumni are caring for those most in need here and around the world. And our graduate alumni are leading organizations both in the acute care and community settings and in the educational arena. Their leadership is impacting nursing practice, nursing education, and the healthcare industry.
""This degree allowed me the opportunity to work as the hands and feet of the Lord...""
“One thing I love about LUSON is how much every single faculty pours into and values students and each other. LUSON quickly becomes a part of your family.”
After graduating from Liberty University, Rachel joined the UT Health San Antonio faculty as Professor of Nursing.
“I met the love of my life, Brian, at Liberty University and we married in 2012”
“I seek to use my Christian faith to support and promote ethical hospital and public policies…”
“Maya is passionate about medical missions and sharing the love of Jesus to underdeveloped countries…”
Featured School of Nursing Articles
Christian Compassion
In the School of Nursing, we say we are the hands and feet, the heart of Christ to a hurting world. Our prayer is that God would open the eyes of our hearts, that He would break our hearts with the things that break His heart. On Clinical Missions Trips, LUSON students get to experience hands-on clinical training and utilize nursing skills while providing much-needed services and health education in countries like Rwanda, Kenya, Nepal, and Israel.
Accreditation for the School of Nursing
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and post graduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing is accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education, 655 K Street, NW, Suite 750, Washington, DC 20001, (202) 887-6791.
The Liberty University School of Nursing Simulation Center is fully accredited by the Society for Simulation in Healthcare (SSH).
It allowed many students to continue learning virtually in 2020 due to COVID-19.
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) to award associate, bachelor’s, master’s, specialist, and doctoral degrees. For questions about the accreditation of Liberty University, please contact: Commission on Colleges 1866 Southern Ln. Decatur, GA 30033-4097 (404) 679-4500. Inquiries about the institution itself, such as admission requirements, financial aid, educational programs, etc., should be addressed directly to Liberty University."
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/computer-science/web-mobile-programming/","Residential Web & Mobile Programming Program
Develop the skills you need to help make your client’s vision a reality. With your Bachelor of Science in Computer Science – Web and Mobile Programming degree, you’ll learn to utilize standard development, security, and operations (DevSecOps) to design and create websites and mobile applications that are efficient, effective, and user-friendly.
By earning this degree from a Christian university, you’ll learn from experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith. You’ll also gain experience testing applications, writing in coding languages such as HTML, monitoring website traffic, and more.
Academics: Web & Mobile Programming Cognate
Featured Web & Mobile Programming Courses
Programming in C++ Advanced (CSCN 112)
Front-end Programming in JavaScript (CSCN 315)
Web Programming in HTML (CSCN 310)
Mobile Programming (CSCN 408)
Career Opportunities in Web & Mobile Programming
Front-End Developer
Back-End Developer
Full-Stack Developer
Middle-Tier Developer
Web Developer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/","The 141,000 square-foot Center for Music and the Worship Arts includes a 1,600-seat concert hall, two recital halls, 43 teaching studios, a 250-seat instrumental classroom, a 150-seat choir room, five large music theory classrooms, and a state-of-the-art recording studio, as well as songwriting, Mac, and piano labs.
Liberty offers state-of-the-art recording studios equipped with the finest acoustics, advanced technology to publish and produce music, and a unique architecture that encourages soundproof environments."
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/computer-science/","Residential Bachelor of Education in Computer Science Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Licensure
Share your passion for Computer Science with young learners through a Bachelor of Education in Computer Science Education, Grades 6-12. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses in computer science education. Our education methods classes are designed to give you the tools to meet the needs of every learner. You’ll learn how to utilize the strengths all students bring to the classroom. In-field classroom experiences throughout the program will allow you to put the theory you learn into practice. Classes in programming, database management, and software engineering will prepare you to teach these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in computer science education. Liberty faculty will show you how to view teaching through a biblical worldview. You’ll be ready to make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Computer Science Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about computers and want to help learners develop the same zeal. You’ll have the opportunity to gain state licensure and the qualifications needed to teach students at the middle or high school level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Computer Science Education Courses
Algorithms and Data Structures (CSIS 215)
Web Architecture and Development (CSIS 310)
Database System Concepts (CSIS 326)
Software Engineering (CSIS 471)
Calculus and Analytic Geometry I (MATH 131)
Career Opportunities in Computer Science Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach Computer Science Education in grades 6-12.
Secondary Computer Science School Teacher
K-12 Education Consultant
K-12 Curriculum Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/computer-science-cybersecurity/","Defend Digital Information with an Online Computer Science Degree in Cybersecurity
Information is power, and the number of cyber threats for data theft is rapidly increasing in today’s digital world. Liberty University’s computer science cybersecurity bachelor’s degree can help equip you with the training and skills you need to fight cybercriminals, terrorists, and data breaches within your company as well as on a national and global scale. Our School of Business has designed this program to help you handle a variety of technical and ethical challenges in the computer science field.
Our seasoned professors have years of experience and are ready to share their knowledge with you as you seek to gain a firm foundation in algorithms and problem-solving. By pursuing a cyber security bachelor’s degree, you can learn how to help companies build secure networks and protect important data. Partner with us and earn a Bachelor of Science (BS) in Computer Science Cybersecurity that can help you get where you need to go.
What’s the difference between computer science and cyber security?
As you study computer science, you’ll explore the math, logic, and programming skills needed to develop software, set up secure networks, and analyze algorithms. Cyber security is a specialized subset of this field that focuses on how to protect computers and networks from cyber attacks.
Because Liberty University’s computer science program integrates cyber security studies, you’ll receive a well-rounded education that can help you prepare for a variety of challenges. Some of the topics you’ll study include:
Database management
Information and computer security
Modern cryptography
Network architecture
Software engineering
System administration
Why Choose Our Bachelor’s in Cybersecurity and Computer Science Online Degree?
Our computer science and cybersecurity professors have a wide range of knowledge, backgrounds, and skills. They can teach you how to overcome the challenges that arise in this industry and protect the security of our nation’s networks. Because our bachelor of cyber security is 100% online, you can pursue this degree without sacrificing time at work or with your family, church, or community.
Here’s what sets us apart:
Affordability | While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting. Our bachelor’s in computer science online degree follows our standard undergraduate tuition rate of just $390 per credit hour for full-time students. We also offer a variety of scholarship opportunities and specialized discounts – such as a military discount – so you could potentially earn your degree for even less!
Credibility | Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC), so you can rest assured that you’re earning your degree from a well-respected institution.
Flexibility | Going back to school is a big decision, and we want to make the process as smooth as possible. Our 100% online, 8-week courses are designed to offer you maximum flexibility – giving you the freedom to earn your degree without putting your life on hold.
Hands-On Training | Throughout your courses, you won’t just study topics from a textbook – you’ll complete hands-on assignments and projects that will help you put your skills to the test. If you want to go a step further to boost your résumé, you can also complete an optional internship as part of your bachelor of computer science cybersecurity. The internship can be completed at an approved location near you, so you can gain valuable experience without having to leave your area!
Designations
Liberty University has been designated a National Security Agency and Department of Homeland Security Center of Academic Excellence for Cyber Defense Education (NSA/DHS CAE-CDE).
FAQs About Our Computer Science Cybersecurity Bachelor’s Degree
Can you get a computer science degree online?
How long does it take to get a computer science degree online?
What can you do with a bachelor’s in cyber security and computer science?
What is the salary and career outlook with a bachelor of computer science cyber security degree?
Will this degree help me earn industry certifications?
Is an online computer science degree respected?
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Cyber Security and Computer Science Online Degree?
Throughout our online computer science and cyber security degree, you can gain skills that are essential in the computer and IT field. In this program, you’ll study topics like programming languages, data structures, and database management systems.
You can also learn how to implement and maintain complex software systems within cost boundaries and on schedule. Our online degree in computer science is designed to hone your technical, analytical, and problem-solving abilities – so you can prepare to face the unique challenges of this industry and develop creative solutions that help organizations of all sizes thrive.
Additionally, this online degree in cyber security and computer science covers important methods for fighting existing threats to computer security and equipping networks to withstand future attacks. You’ll also have room for elective courses while completing your online degree in cybersecurity and computer science. That way, you can customize your program to match your interests and goals. One option is to complete a computer science internship – giving you the chance to gain hands-on experience in your field!
Upon completing this degree in computer science online, you can be better equipped to:
Analyze applications to solve organizational needs
Carry out basic and advanced computer programming concepts using the C++ language
Construct solid defenses to guard against cyber attacks
Design and implement software that efficiently utilizes operating systems
Implement essential cryptographic protocols to protect information from digital threats
Featured Courses
CSIS 112 – Advanced Programming Using C++
CSIS 355 – Network Architecture and Protocols
CSIS 461 – Technical Aspects of Computer Security
CSIS 463 – Modern Cryptography
Highlights of Liberty’s BS in Computer Science Cyber Security Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online bachelor’s degree in computer science cybersecurity from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can gain practical, hands-on experience by completing an optional internship as part of your online cyber security bachelor’s degree.
You could earn potential college credit for your life experience through our Experience Plus program – allowing you to finish your degree faster.
Many of the courses in our cyber security computer science program can help you prepare to pursue various IT certifications.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/computational-mathematics/engineering/","Develop a Diverse Skill Set with Our Bachelor’s in Computational Mathematics – Engineering Degree Online
Mathematical models are frequently used to solve problems in a variety of industries — including biology, business, computer science, and medicine. The engineering field is also strongly informed by research in applied mathematics. For instance, engineers often rely heavily on mathematical simulations to design robotic arms or computer chips.
Do you want to use your math skills to inspire real-world solutions to engineering problems? If so, Liberty’s 100% online B.S. in Computational Mathematics – Engineering degree is for you! Throughout this program, you will analyze mathematics as a tool to promote practical application. You’ll receive hands-on training in core math subjects so you can be better prepared to work in many different industries.
Prepare to solve problems in engineering using statistics, analysis, and discrete mathematics. Liberty’s engineering specialization can help you gain a broad base of knowledge in various engineering topics. You can choose from a wide array of courses and explore the topics you’re most passionate about!
Partner with us and use your math skills to inspire developments in the world of engineering!
Please note: This program does not prepare or qualify students to sit for the FE (Fundamentals of Engineering) or the PE (Principles and Practice of Engineering) exams.
Why Choose Liberty’s Computational Mathematics – Engineering Bachelor’s Degree Online?
At Liberty, we seek to equip students like you with the knowledge, skills, and values essential for impacting the world. Our goal is to help you thrive in your academic and professional life. With our engineering mathematics program, you can study important topics in applied mathematics and prepare to help solve real-world problems in a variety of industries — particularly engineering.
Choosing Liberty means choosing:
Valuable Mentorship | Our faculty have years of industry experience and advanced degrees in math- and engineering-related fields. They are ready and eager to guide you through hands-on assignments and answer any questions you may have.
Flexibility | Balancing school and work may seem difficult, but it doesn’t have to be. Our B.S. in Computational Mathematics – Engineering program is available 100% online, and the classes have no set login times. You’ll have the freedom to earn your degree from anywhere in the world without putting your life on hold!
Comprehensive Curriculum | We’ve designed our engineering and computational mathematics courses to blend theoretical concepts, practical application, and biblical principles. At Liberty, you can train to serve as a Champion for Christ — someone who leads with excellence and integrity in the workplace.
Accredited Degree | Liberty is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). You can be confident that our curriculum has met rigorous academic standards and accreditation requirements.
What Will You Learn in Our Engineering Mathematics Degree?
This program includes foundational courses in critical thinking, communications, English, and the sciences. Our goal is to help you develop professional skills that are essential in all industries. You’ll also study topics in theology and Christian living, allowing you to build a strong ethical foundation for your future career.
Your core computational mathematics courses will cover a variety of topics, including abstract algebraic structures, probability, matrix and linear algebra, and applied differential equations. You will also study analytic geometry and mathematical modeling so you can develop essential knowledge needed in many industries.
Our engineering concentration has no set courses, which means you’ll have the freedom to mix and match different types of classes! You can choose from our wide array of courses in general, industrial, or civil engineering. You could study topics like hydraulic engineering, steel structure design, statics, or fluid dynamics. Other subjects you may want to explore include:
Computer-aided design
Data analysis and machine learning
Engineering design
Operations and research logistics
Surveying
The choice is yours. You can develop a diverse skill set that could help boost your marketability with our computational mathematics and engineering degree. And you can prepare to use your knowledge of applied mathematics to solve real-world engineering challenges.
Featured Courses
MATH 410 – Matrix and Linear Algebra
MATH 430 – Multivariable Calculus
MATH 432 – Applied Differential Equations*
MATH 460 – Mathematical Modeling and Simulation*
*Course guide coming soon
Highlights of Liberty’s Computational Mathematics – Online Engineering Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty is accredited by SACSCOC, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges.
You can earn your bachelor’s in computational mathematics – engineering degree in just 3.5 years!
Study under industry experts with years of experience in the fields of engineering and applied mathematics."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/computational-mathematics/actuarial/","Gain a Diverse Set of Practical Skills with an Actuarial Mathematics Bachelor’s Degree
As an actuary, you would take your applied math skills and focus them on identifying opportunities over long periods of time. Businesses, insurance companies, and financial institutions are looking for people with actuarial math skills. They need individuals who can help enhance the consumer experience based on their past purchases, behavior, and interests. A large part of an actuary’s skills will involve the mathematical science of probability.
By pursuing a B.S. in Computational Mathematics – Actuarial from Liberty University, you can be better prepared for actuarial exams and employment. Through this program, you will complete the coursework necessary to earn 2 Validation by Education Experience (VEE) credits, and you will be introduced to the material in the first actuarial exam. Passing the preliminary actuarial exams and earning VEEs are necessary for entry-level actuarial employment.
One of the reasons actuaries are highly sought after is their ability to analyze risk. You can learn how to develop equations and solve problems such as likely life expectancy and premium rates based on an individual’s risk factors. If you want a lucrative career, you can gain a valuable skill set through our computational mathematics degree that can help you get there.
Why Choose Liberty’s Computational Mathematics – Actuarial Degree?
At Liberty, we want you to earn a degree that prepares you for success in life and your chosen career path. Our actuarial mathematics degree can give you the skills needed to start in this high-demand, high-paying job field. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that the median yearly salary for an actuary in 2019 was $102,880, and the projected job growth is much faster than average at 20% over the next 10 years.*
We want you to learn from the best professors in a program designed for practical application. Our mission is to equip you for your actuarial exams or graduate school through this program. Additionally, we want to help you learn ethical principles from a Christian perspective that can be applied to your future career.
What is an actuary?
Actuaries perform many tasks, which include:
Advising insurance companies on how much money they need to set aside to cover future insurance claims
Designing pension and healthcare plans
Predicting how much money will be needed to cover damages that may be caused during future hurricanes
Using statistics to estimate risks
The skills you gain in our actuarial math program can prepare you for not only actuary jobs but also other areas where your statistical math skills might come in handy. You could become a financial advisor, investment banker, or even work with computer scientists and engineers to develop systems and products.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook Handbook, Actuaries, (visited June 24, 2020). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Computational Mathematics – Actuarial Degree?
Liberty University’s B.S. in Computational Mathematics – Actuarial degree provides foundational courses in English, the sciences, and research as well as courses teaching Christian principles. These courses will help guide you through your professional life no matter what career path you take.
With a major in applied mathematics, you’ll take all the core courses you need to set yourself up for success in any math-based field. Your courses will include topics like probability, analytic geometry, and calculus. This degree will also focus on other math-related subjects like applied differential equations and mathematical modeling and simulation to help you gain the practical experience you need for various industries.
Our actuarial specialization will provide further training to help you succeed in the world of business, finance, and insurance. You can learn to analyze microeconomic issues, including market structures, government regulations, labor market, financial market, and international trade. You will also study macroeconomic problems, including business cycles, unemployment, and inflation. Your courses will generally cover financial and managerial accounting, corporate finances, marketing, investments, application programming, and economics.
Featured Courses
ACCT 211 – Financial Accounting
BUSI 320 – Finance Principles
MATH 211 – Introduction to Statistical Analysis
MATH 441 – Probability I
Highlights of Our Actuarial Mathematics Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You could complete your B.S. in Computational Mathematics – Actuarial in as little as 3.5 years!
Actuarial math is the fastest growing area in mathematics.
All of our professors have real-life experience in the field and teach courses from a biblical worldview.
You can learn how to solve problems with math by focusing on creating solutions.
Students are well-prepared to work in business, finance, or insurance.
The program is managed according to the standards of the Society of Actuaries."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/computational-mathematics/","Use Math and Science to Solve Problems with a Bachelor’s Degree in Computational Mathematics
How do we create a robotic arm that can manipulate one piece of equipment so precisely that it can be trusted to work in the International Space Station? How might a disease spread in populated areas in the event of a biological attack? Is it possible to measure sentiment change by analyzing social media, likes, shares, and comments? Problems like these and many more are just part of what someone with a degree in computational mathematics might study.
Gain a deeper mathematical knowledge and further develop skills needed for endless career opportunities by pursuing a B.S. in Computational Mathematics from Liberty University. Through this degree, you can be better be equipped with the skills necessary for careers in data analytics, finance, government, business, and technology contexts. We also have various specializations that can better prepare you for future employment.
So what are you waiting for? You want a lucrative career, and you need a valuable skill set to get you there. Pursuing our computational mathematics degree means gaining the knowledge and tools needed to work in the diverse areas of math and science.
Why Choose Liberty’s Computational Mathematics Degree?
When pursuing your degree with Liberty University, you can study with confidence. Liberty is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACSCOC), so you can rest assured that you are receiving a world-class education. In addition, you can pursue 
With a degree in computational mathematics, you will be setting yourself up for success in medical, scientific, pharmaceutical, industrial research, and epidemiology settings. What’s more, fields related to science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) are projected to have a much faster job growth than non-STEM jobs according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.* Earning an applied math degree from Liberty can help set you apart from the competition as you pursue a STEM career.
One of the things we love about our computational math program is our professors. These individuals are professionals in their field who have real-life experience and related graduate- and doctoral-level degrees. Additionally, the courses in this program are designed so that mathematics theory is balanced with applications. With training like this, you can prepare to apply what you have learned in the field.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Employment in STEM Occupations (viewed online June 24, 2020). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Computational Mathematics Degree?
As part of your B.S. in Computational Mathematics degree, you will complete courses in English, natural science, social science, and research as well as courses teaching Christian principles. These courses will help guide you through your professional life no matter what career path you take. However, we also aim to provide you with a specific skill set related to your calling in life.
With a major in applied mathematics, you’ll take a variety of core courses so you can set yourself up for success in many math-based field. Your courses will include topics like probability, linear regression, and calculus. You will also take a course in differential equations and mathematical modeling and simulation to help you gain the practical experience you need for various industries.
Featured Courses
MATH 211 – Introduction to Statistical Analysis
MATH 250 – Introduction to Discrete Mathematics
MATH 410 – Matrix and Linear Algebra
MATH 441 – Probability I
General
Actuarial
Computer Science
Engineering
Information Systems"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/computational-mathematics/information-systems/","Use Math and Science to Further Your Career in the Field of Information Systems
How can the study of mathematics be applied to help businesses gain a competitive edge in today’s marketplace? There are many answers, but one of the best ways is to increase the efficiency and ability of their information systems to allow them to analyze data and make smart, data-driven decisions. Solving problems and creating smart solutions for businesses are just a few of the things someone with a degree in computational mathematics – information systems might do.
Gain the mathematical knowledge and skills for endless career opportunities by pursuing a B.S. in Computational Mathematics – Information Systems from Liberty University. Through this degree, you can be equipped with the skills necessary for careers in data analytics, finance, government, business, and technology contexts. Your focus on information systems will help you gain a foundational knowledge of the implementation and management of computer and web development in support of business objectives. 
So what are you waiting for? You want a lucrative career, and you need a valuable skill set to get you there. Pursuing our information systems mathematics degree means gaining the knowledge and tools needed to work in the growing field of computational math and information systems.
Why Choose Liberty’s Computational Mathematics – Information Systems Degree?
When receiving your degree from Liberty University, you can study with confidence. You’ll know you’re getting real-life experience, courses that meet accreditation requirements, and professional faculty members who partner with you for success.
With a degree in computational mathematics, you will be preparing yourself for a variety of industrial, medical, and information technology-related careers. What’s more, jobs related to computers and information systems are projected to have a faster than average growth of 10% through 2029 according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.*
Your information systems specialization will grant you further focus for a career working to help businesses further their use of data in business and how best to utilize it in a safe and efficient manner. You can learn how to develop solutions to problems and how to safeguard an organization’s data while increasing the speed, accuracy, and capacity of their systems to maintain a competitive edge in today’s marketplace.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Computer and information systems-managers, 2019 (viewed online December 17, 2020). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Computational Mathematics Degree?
As part of your B.S. in Computational Mathematics – Information Systems degree, you will complete courses in English, natural science, social science, and research, as well as courses on Christian principles. These courses will help guide you through your professional life no matter what career path you take. However, we also aim to provide you with a specific skill set related to your calling in life.
With a major in applied mathematics, you’ll take all the core courses you need to set yourself up for success in any math-based field. Your courses will include topics like probability, linear regression, and calculus. This degree will focus on subjects related to applied math like differential equations and mathematical modeling and simulation to help you gain the practical experience you need for various industries.
The information systems specialization will further your applied mathematics skills by teaching you about the design, selection, implementation, and management of enterprise business solutions. Learning how to employ technology to achieve a competitive advantage in business will be one of the cornerstones for your future as an information systems professional.
You will also gain a thorough knowledge of the foundation of web architecture and the current technologies used in website development. An essential part of your education will be learning the basic issues and principles of information system security. Understanding the risks associated with personal and business use of computers can help you employ prudent measures to defend your future employer against malicious cyber attacks.
Featured Courses
CSIS 110 – Introduction to Computing Sciences
CSIS 208 – Application Programming
MATH 211 – Introduction to Statistical Analysis
MATH 250 – Introduction to Discrete Mathematics
Highlights of Our Online Computational Mathematics Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online mathematics degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
All professors have real-life experience in the field and teach courses from a biblical worldview.
Learn how to solve problems with math that is focused on creating solutions.
Students who complete this program can be well-prepared to work in business, finance, or information technology-related fields."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/computational-mathematics/computer-science/","Pursue a Rewarding Career in STEM with a Computational Mathematics and Computer Science Degree
Are you fascinated with the algorithms that govern computers and other technologies? Do you want to develop mathematical models and equations that promote real-world application? Are you seeking a career that draws on your knowledge of mathematics to solve problems in business, science, and engineering?
If that sounds like you, Liberty’s online B.S. in Computational Mathematics – Computer Science degree can help! Throughout this program, you’ll explore core topics in computing structures, equations, and algorithms — tools that inform scientific research and technological development. You can gain practical, vital skills in many STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) careers.
Our computer science specialization provides focused training in programming, data structures, and information security. You’ll learn about the algorithmic and theoretical foundations that underlie computer processes. With this knowledge, you could help design software programs or develop solutions to computing challenges.
Partner with us and use your passion for mathematics to produce real-world results.
Why Choose Liberty’s Computational Mathematics – Computer Science Degree Online?
At Liberty, we’re committed to Training Champions for Christ. We’ve designed our computational mathematics program to meet your needs as a student and professional. You can gain the credentials, skills, and practical experience needed to pursue a variety of career paths.
Here are some of the benefits of choosing Liberty for your bachelor’s degree:
Flexibility | Our B.S. in Computational Mathematics – Computer Science degree is offered 100% online. You can earn your degree from the comfort of your home and easily access your course materials whenever you need them — without needing to relocate or take time off from work!
Experienced Faculty | In this program, you’ll study under professors who have spent years working in applied mathematics and computer science. With their guidance, you can hone your expertise and complete hands-on assignments designed to help equip you for success.
Valuable Credentials | Liberty is accredited by SACSCOC, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges. You can pursue your degree with confidence knowing that our programs have met rigorous academic standards.
Career Preparation | Our computational mathematics and computer science degree offers a blend of theoretical knowledge and practical application. You can prepare for a variety of exciting careers that require knowledge of computer programming and mathematical models. For instance, you could pursue a career in software development — a lucrative field that is projected to grow 22% from 2019 to 2029!*
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Software Developers (viewed online Dec. 17, 2020). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Computational Mathematics and Computer Science Bachelor’s Degree Online?
Within your core major courses, you will study a variety of math-related subjects, including statistical analysis, linear algebra, discrete mathematics, and probability. This program also emphasizes applied differential equations and mathematical modeling and simulation, with the goal of helping you launch an exciting career in STEM.
Our computer science specialization analyzes the algorithms, structures, and programming languages that underlie computer systems. You will gain a solid foundation in theoretical concepts, then apply that knowledge to practical studies in software engineering, C++ application development, and algorithm design. You can develop the skills needed to design and develop effective software and hardware. That way, you can make a positive impact on society by solving practical problems in a variety of industries.
Learn how to protect data from criminal attacks. With the computer science specialization, you will also receive an introduction to information systems and security. You’ll learn how to leverage technology to solve business problems and help companies maintain a competitive advantage. Additionally, our computational mathematics degree allows you to select various elective classes, including 3 courses in the natural sciences.
Earn your degree today and prepare to pursue your career goals!
Featured Courses
CSIS 112 – Advanced Programming
CSIS 215 – Algorithms and Data Structures
CSIS 340 – Studies in Information Security
MATH 250 – Introduction to Discrete Mathematics
Highlights of Liberty’s Computer Science and Computational Mathematics Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online computer science degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can complete your B.S. in Computational Mathematics – Computer Science degree in as little as 3.5 years!
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
Develop the problem-solving and analytical skills needed to pursue jobs in a variety of industries."
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/conservation-environmental-biology/","B.S. in Conservation & Environmental Biology
Residential Conservation & Environmental Biology Program
Gain an understanding of the role of stewardship we have as part of God’s creation with a Bachelor of Science in Conservation & Environmental Biology degree from Liberty University. This degree will prepare you for graduate school, help you to secure industry or government jobs.
Our freshman and sophomore science courses are designed to give you a broad background in biology, earth science, chemistry, and physics. Our upper-level courses build on this base of knowledge as you engage in many “hands-on” experiences during our field labs. For example, you will conduct in-stream impact assessments using electrofishing equipment, use elastomer to mark newts to estimate their population size using mark-recapture methods, map out movement patterns of animals using telemetry, geographical information system software, and global positioning system technology.
Upper-level students also engage in team-based research projects directed by our professors including ecophysiological boundaries of the Peaks of Otter salamander, a species of salamander unique to central Virginia, migration dynamics of the Saw-whet owl in the Piedmont, or box turtle urban ecology.
The B.S. in Conservation & Environmental Biology is offered through the Department of Biology & Chemistry.
View Testimonial
Academics: Conservation & Environmental Biology (B.S.)
Courses You Could Take
General Biology II (BIOL 225)
Microbiology (BIOL 303)
Botany (BIOL 317)
Ecology (BIOL 310)
Environmental Science & Policy (ENVR 350)
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities
College Professor/Researcher
Environmental Health
Environmental Field Technician
Conservationist
Environmental Law
High School Biology Teacher
Middle School Biology Teacher"
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/","B.S. in Criminal Justice
Request Info Apply Now
Residential B.S. in Criminal Justice
Launch your career with the knowledge and skills you need to enter the criminal justice field. Get a foundational understanding of the history, philosophy, and practical issues that impact the U.S. criminal justice system in local, state, and federal law enforcement agencies.
At the Helms School of Government, we help students stand out as Christ-centered moral, ethical, and value-driven men and women. Gain the skill sets necessary to excel as a leader in courts, corrections, and policing in all jurisdictions.
Whether you’re pursuing an entry-level position or you’re currently employed and seeking to enhance your career, let us help you become a leader in your field.
Learn How To:
Evaluate the nature of the criminal justice system from a biblical worldview
Communicate effectively in both written and oral formats
Demonstrate competence in the discipline of criminal justice
Solve various criminal justice dilemmas
Evaluate substantive and procedural criminal law from a Constitutional perspective
Academic Information for the B.S. in Criminal Justice
View Testimonial
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
Law enforcement personnel who can document successful completion from an accredited police officer school in their state may earn up to 14 credit hours toward their degree. Military experience may also be evaluated for potential college credit.
Career Opportunities With a Criminal Justice Degree
Criminologist
Customs Service Inspector
Detective
Federal Agent (various: CIA, DEA, FBI, U.S. Marshals, Secret Service, etc.)
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
Fraud Investigator
Police Officer
Parole Officer
Prosecutor’s Office Investigator
Military Service
Crime Scene Investigator
Where Students Have Interned
U.S. Marshals
NCIS (Naval Criminal Investigative Service)
FBI
Metropolitan Police Department
U.S. Secret Service
Fairfax County Police Department
Alexandria Police Department
US Marshals in Arlington, Va. – NSOTC Intern
Where Alumni Have Worked
AECOM – Defense Services Sector
Department of Public Safety – Cobb County, Ga.
Virginia State Police
Transportation Security Administration (TSA)
U.S. Department of Defense
Virginia Department of Juvenile Justice
Alaska State Trooper
Arlington (VA) County Police
Chesterfield (VA) County Police
Find internship opportunities on our internships page and on Handshake.
“The criminal justice program at Liberty matched my passion for justice and serving people. The criminal justice professors truly care for their students. The program provides a unique atmosphere not available at most schools.” – Brittany Peters Hopkins, Lynchburg Police Department"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/","Take the Next Step in Your Career with a Criminal Justice Degree Online
Are you interested in pursuing a career in law enforcement? Perhaps you’re looking to protect your community as a first-time police officer. Maybe you’ve worked as a law enforcement officer for years – but you’d like to earn a career-enhancing credential and pursue positions of added responsibility. If either of these sounds like you, Liberty’s online criminal justice degree may be exactly what you need.
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Criminal Justice can help you gain the skills you need to be successful in the criminal justice system. This degree program offers multiple specializations – allowing you to gain fundamental criminal justice expertise while growing in a specific area that you’re passionate about. Our 100% online criminal justice degree can also help prepare you for future certification and promotion possibilities.
With this program, you can build up your credibility through the development of excellent speaking and writing skills, which are vital in both professional and personal settings. Our online criminal justice degree courses can help equip you with an in-depth understanding of substantive and procedural criminal law, ethics, criminology, and much more.
There has never been a better time to pursue an online criminal justice degree, and with Liberty, it has never been simpler. Don’t put your career on hold any longer – partner with us, gain valuable knowledge, and take your career to new heights. 
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Criminal Justice Degree?
As a pioneer in distance education since 1985, we understand what it takes to design a flexible, affordable online degree program that will challenge you to grow while respecting your personal commitments. Our online criminal justice program is designed to enhance your life – not control it. Our degree in law enforcement is more than a tool that you can use to broaden your career prospects – it is an opportunity for personal enrichment and growth.
Liberty’s bachelor’s in criminal justice degree online can help you gain an understanding of the internal workings of the criminal justice system. Throughout your criminal justice online program, you will study the constitutional, procedural, and structural differences of the federal criminal justice and representative systems.
Many students pursuing our criminal justice degree program are full-time law enforcement officers or other working professionals who need flexible education. Our bachelor’s in criminal justice is offered entirely online with no requirement to come to our campus. This allows you to continue serving your community or business while furthering your education online.
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s in Criminal Justice Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BS in Criminal Justice degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Tuition for our criminal justice degree online has not increased in 8 years. While many other colleges and online schools for criminal justice have raised tuition, Liberty has been able to keep costs low as a nonprofit university.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/advanced-investigative-studies/","Residential Criminal Investigation Degree
Train to become a criminal investigator in local, state, and federal law enforcement positions. The Bachelor of Science in Criminal Justice: Advanced Investigative Studies degree provides world-class, industry-relevant education to future criminal investigators. The industry is challenging, and our degree will lead you through a series of specific investigative courses that will help prepare you for your career.
The Advanced Investigative Studies cognate is designed for students who seek to affect the liberty, safety, and security of the American people through legal and ethical criminal investigations.
Learn How To:
Evaluate the nature of the criminal justice system from a biblical worldview
Communicate effectively in both written and oral formats
Solve various criminal justice dilemmas
Academics for the BS in Criminal Justice: Advanced Investigative Studies
Featured Criminal Investigation Courses
Court & Expert Witness Testimony (CJUS 369)
Interview & Interrogation (CJUS 405)
Criminal Investigations II (CJUS 421)
Criminal Investigations III (CJUS 423)
Law enforcement personnel who can document successful completion from an accredited police officer school in their state may earn up to 14 credit hours toward their degree. Military experience may also be evaluated for potential college credit.
Start Your Career in Criminal Investigation
Criminal Investigation Career Opportunities 
Local Detective
State Special Agent
National Level Special Agents
Military Special Agent"
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/crime-scene-investigation/","Request Info Apply Now
Residential Crime Scene Investigation Program
Through our B.S. in Criminal Justice: Crime Scene Investigation degree, you’ll gain the forensic skills as well as the foundational knowledge for a career in criminal investigation.
Our professors have years of law enforcement experience and teach using hands-on activities to provide you with a practical understanding of criminology, corrections, and juvenile justice.
Learn How To:
Properly gather and process evidence
Manage and photograph crime scenes
Perform forensic computer and cyber analyses
Conduct criminal investigations
Academics: Crime Scene Investigation Cognate
Featured Courses
Crime Scene Photography (CJUS 361)
Crime Scene Management (CJUS 362)
Computer & Cyber Forensics (CJUS 363)
Criminal Investigations I (CJUS 420)
Law enforcement personnel who can document successful completion from an accredited police officer school in their state may earn up to 14 credit hours toward their degree. Military experience may also be evaluated for potential college credit.
Career Opportunities in Crime Scene Investigation
Computer Forensics Specialist
Crime Scene Investigator
Federal Agent
Police Officer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/business-administration-management/","Help Protect and Serve Your Community with a Bachelor’s in Criminal Justice – Business Administration and Management Degree
Combining your passion for business, leadership, and criminal justice into a degree program may be easier than you think! Liberty’s 100% online B.S. in Criminal Justice – Business Administration and Management degree seeks to equip students for administrative and supervisory roles in criminal justice agencies.
Throughout this program, you can gain a thorough understanding of the American criminal justice system. You’ll also explore core topics in business, accounting, and management. By combining this knowledge, you can pursue a wide variety of exciting careers.
Criminal justice agencies around the country need strong leaders who can manage resources, develop short- and long-term objectives, and inspire team members to achieve organizational goals. If that sounds like something you’d enjoy doing, our criminal justice and business management degree is for you!
Partner with us and prepare to launch your career in the criminal justice field!
What can you do with a bachelor’s degree in criminal justice business management?
How much can you make with a bachelor’s in criminal justice – business administration?
Why pursue a business administration and criminal justice degree?
Why Choose Liberty’s Business and Criminal Justice Program?
At Liberty, we strive to live out Christ-like characteristics and to use the power of faith and education to transform people and the world. We don’t just offer degrees — we provide an opportunity for you to become a Champion for Christ in your chosen career path.
Balancing school and work may seem daunting, but it doesn’t have to be. To help ensure your success, we’ve designed a 100% online criminal justice degree program. With 8-week courses and no set login times, you’ll have the flexibility to earn your degree from anywhere in the world.
As a criminal justice and business administration student, you’ll learn from seasoned professors with years of real-world experience. Our faculty are invested in your success and ready to help boost your criminal justice expertise.
Maybe you’re currently serving as a criminal justice professional and want to gain additional credentials. Or perhaps you’re looking to enter the job market for the first time. Either way, Liberty provides the affordable tuition rates, high-quality academics, and marketable credentials you need to pursue your career goals.
Generous Discount for Active Duty Law Enforcement and Other First Responders
Liberty University is committed to providing world-class education and aims to help students achieve their educational goals, in whatever way we can. The First Responder Discount was created to take some of the financial burdens of tuition off the men and women who work in public service.
As Liberty University’s way of saying ‘Thank you,’ we proudly provide you with the following benefits:
A 25% tuition discount
Potential college credit for training and life experience
Personalized service throughout your educational journey
Potential stacking with other tuition benefits (Corporate Advantage Program or Military Benefits)
For more information on eligibility and claiming this discount, please visit the First Responder Discount page.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Criminal Justice Administration Online Degree?
In this program, you’ll take several core courses in criminal justice. The topics you’ll study include juvenile justice, criminal law, law enforcement corrections, terrorism, the judicial process, and criminal investigations. With this knowledge, you can effectively fight criminal behavior and keep your community safe.
You can also strengthen your communication skills as you learn about criminal justice research and report writing. By examining the moral dilemmas that often arise in law enforcement, you can become equipped to navigate the challenges of the profession and serve with integrity. Through this program, you can prepare to take on many types of criminal justice administration jobs.
The business administration and management cognate dives into topics like financial accounting, organizational behavior, and business law. You’ll learn how to manage many aspects of an organization — from human capital to financial resources — in a way that promotes effectiveness and efficiency. With this knowledge, you can help ensure that criminal justice agencies fulfill their duty to protect and serve communities.
Highlights of Our Criminal Justice Management B.S. Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online Bachelor of Science in Criminal Justice administration degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral online programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all online undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty is regionally accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
As an online student, you’ll get to network with leaders, policymakers, and experts in law enforcement from across the country.
Our criminal justice administration and management degree is offered in a 100% online, 8-week course format.
Ready to take the next step in your education at the graduate level? If so, check out our master’s in criminal justice!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/crime-scene-investigation/","Learn How to Investigate Crimes and Safeguard Physical Evidence with a Criminal Investigation Degree
These days, CSI brings with it an image of an exciting, action-packed life filled with drama and romance. The actual field of crime scene investigation is not exactly the same as what is portrayed on TV. If you want a rewarding and exciting job that involves helping to solve crimes and mysteries, then join the ranks of the many professionals who have pursued this as their chosen profession. Crime scene investigators can also be called forensic investigators. 
If you are wondering how to become a forensic investigator, then Liberty University’s B.S. in Criminal Justice – Crime Scene Investigation is a great place to start.
Our CSI degree is designed to help provide you with a strong understanding of the criminal justice field and the skills necessary to develop and analyze forensics laws. Through this program, you can learn the essential skills needed to conduct criminal investigations as well as protect and record vital evidence to ensure that it can be accurately analyzed. 
Offered 100% online, our program’s flexibility allows you to graduate in less than 4 years without sacrificing your career — because our goal is to support you as both a student and a professional as you become a positive force in the criminal justice field. You can gain the knowledge you need to pursue roles at police departments and government agencies across the country.
What Does a Forensic Scientist Do?
The general term “forensic science technician” is used for someone who aids criminal investigations by collecting, safeguarding, and analyzing evidence. Usually, you would pick an area to specialize in such as crime scene investigation or laboratory analysis. If you were working at a crime scene, you would be involved in analyzing the scene and determining what evidence is there and how it can be collected. 
You would then record the scene for use in the investigation by taking photographs, making sketches, and marking the location and position of evidence. This evidence would then be brought to a crime lab for further analysis.
In the laboratory, you might perform chemical, biological, and microscopic analyses on the evidence that was taken from the crime scene. This would involve analyzing DNA results and consulting with other experts on areas such as toxicology to determine if someone was poisoned. You might work with medical experts to study the causes of death and the identity of the victims through dental records.
Liberty University’s forensic science online degree focuses on helping to prepare you for these roles by covering essential skills that would typically be studied in a criminal justice program. Our online forensic science bachelor’s degree helps provide the knowledge and tools you need to approach your career with confidence. 
Why Choose Liberty’s B.S. in Criminal Justice – Crime Scene Investigation?
At Liberty, we are dedicated to excellence, and as a pioneer in distance learning since 1985, we have a history of innovation. Today, we put our experience to use by providing you with an education that is affordable and at the forefront of forensics. Our goal as a nonprofit Christian university is to help provide you with the knowledge and skills you need to lead in the criminal justice field with strength and integrity. 
This is a great field to get into as employment is projected to grow 14% from 2019 to 2029.* If you want to be out in the field actively recording crime scenes and collecting evidence, then this crime scene investigation degree can help. If you prefer to work in the lab studying the evidence that has been collected, then this degree can help as well.
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC), so your degree has met rigorous academic standards and accreditation requirements. We strive to bring you the best education you can get with the flexibility to study in your home or office without having to travel to campus.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Forensic Science Technicians, 2020 (viewed online June 24, 2021). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s Degree in Criminal Justice?
Through Liberty’s online forensics degree program, you will study both the scientific and analytical aspects of forensics. By analyzing past criminal cases, you can understand what police officers and crime scene investigators go through in the execution of their duties. Learn how to identify, collect, preserve, record, process, and analyze all forms of evidence. You will also learn how to capture the crime scene through the use of digital photography.
Furthermore, you can gain the essential skills needed to conduct a criminal investigation, such as how to process a crime scene and how to collect evidence via subpoenas and interviews. Your crime scene investigator education will teach you what is legal under the Constitution and how criminal laws govern the actions of both police and regular citizens. 
Featured Courses
CJUS 360 – Introduction to Forensics
CJUS 361 – Crime Scene Photography
CJUS 362 – Crime Scene Management
CJUS 420 – Criminal Investigations I
Benefits of Liberty’s Crime Scene Investigation Bachelor’s Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online criminal investigation degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks! 
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
As an online forensic science degree student, you will have the opportunity to network with leaders and experts in the crime scene investigation field from across the country."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/corrections-and-human-services/","Help Reform Criminals and Make Your Country Safer with a Bachelor’s in Criminal Justice – Corrections and Human Services 
Do you long to become an effective advocate for community-based criminal justice reform? Would you like to help deserving individuals find an alternative to traditional sentencing or help with programs that reduce recidivism, the rate of returning to crime? If this sounds interesting, then Liberty University’s B.S. in Criminal Justice – Corrections and Human Services degree might be for you. The industry needs people with a heart for reform, rehabilitation, and restoration – is that you? If so, partner with us and start pursuing your criminal justice degree today!
Our online corrections and human services degree will provide you with a strong foundational understanding of the history, philosophy, and practical issues that influence our criminal justice systems. Designed to be completed in 3.5 years and offered 100% online, our program will allow you to continue to work while going to college – because our goal is to support you as both a student and professional.
Why Should You Choose Liberty University’s Bachelor’s in Criminal Justice – Corrections and Human Services?
Liberty’s online bachelor’s in criminal justice degree will help you gain an understanding of the internal workings of the criminal justice system. Throughout your criminal justice online program, you will study the constitutional, procedural, and structural differences of the federal criminal justice and representative systems.
This corrections and human services program is specifically designed for individuals who want to work on the restorative side of the criminal justice process. You can learn new theories and programs that have been developed to help reform offenders. Upon graduation, you will be equipped with the knowledge and skills needed to be a positive agent of change in the criminal justice system.
Additionally, our bachelor’s in criminal justice is offered entirely online with no on-campus requirements. This allows you to continue serving your church, family, and community while completing your correction specialist education online. If you want to make a difference, this program can help you attain your goals in the post-release community corrections field.
Generous Discount for Active Duty Law Enforcement and Other First Responders
Liberty University is committed to providing world-class education and aims to help students achieve their educational goals, in whatever way we can. The First Responder Discount was created to take some of the financial burdens of tuition off the men and women who work in public service. As Liberty University’s way of saying ‘Thank you,’ we proudly provide you with the following benefits:
A 25% tuition discount
Opportunity for college credit for training and life experience
Personalized service throughout your educational journey
Potential stacking with other tuition benefits (Corporate Advantage Program or Military Benefits)
What Will You Learn in Our Online Bachelor’s in Criminal Justice – Corrections and Human Services?
Liberty University’s online bachelor’s in criminal justice is designed to teach you about each phase of the criminal justice system from entry to trial. Throughout this degree, you can learn from professors who have experience — often in the courtroom or corrections field as well as the classroom. Our corrections degree classes provide learners with a practical approach to studying issues within the corrections system in addition to engaging in exciting research projects and case studies.
With an undergraduate criminal justice degree from Liberty University, you’ll gain the foundational knowledge and in-demand skills you need to prepare you for future careers in corrections. This training includes exposure to: 
Current issues and problems in American law enforcement, courts, and correctional systems.
Evidence-based community corrections programs.
New philosophies within corrections to establish successful rehabilitation programs in the community and outside of traditional prison settings.
Theoretical knowledge and practical skills in crisis intervention.
Featured Courses
CJUS 322 – Community-Based Corrections
CJUS 351 – Criminal Justice Reform*
CJUS 356 – Crisis Intervention for Criminal Justice*
CJUS 357 – Evidence-Based Community Corrections*
*Course guide coming soon 
Highlights of Our Corrections and Human Services Degree Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online criminal justice degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You will have the opportunity to network with leaders, policymakers, and experts in the criminal justice field from all over the country.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/criminal-psychology/","Promote Safety and Justice with a Bachelor’s Degree in Criminal Psychology
Do you love learning about human behavior? Are you passionate about promoting justice and protecting the innocent? Do you want to make the world a safer, fairer place for all people?
If you answered “yes” to any of these questions, then a career in criminal psychology may be right for you! Criminal psychologists seek to understand how the criminal mind works, making them an important asset in the legal system. They often use their expertise to help track down suspects, solve criminal cases, and prevent future crimes from taking place.
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Criminal Justice – Criminal Psychology will help you launch an exciting, rewarding career in criminal psychology. With training from our seasoned faculty, you can strengthen your investigative skills and gain a firm understanding of criminal thoughts, behaviors, and motives.
Why Choose Liberty University’s Criminal Psychology Degree?
As far as online colleges for criminal psychology go, we believe Liberty University stands out. Our program has been designed to help integrate ethical, biblical principles into your professional life. If you are looking for a career that will help you effectively assess and counsel individuals within the justice system while also making a strong impact on those around you, our online criminal psychology degree can help you get there.
What Will You Learn in Our Online B.S. in Criminal Justice — Criminal Psychology Degree Program? 
In this program, you’ll gain in-demand skills that can boost your résumé and help you stand out to employers. By the time you graduate, you’ll be prepared to lead with excellence in the world of criminal psychology.
Build a solid foundation in essential areas of study. This degree offers a mix of psychology, criminal justice, and government courses. You’ll learn how to write case briefings, memoranda, and formal reports. You’ll also study important aspects of the criminal justice system, including juvenile justice, the judicial process, ethics, criminal law, and criminal investigations.
Explore topics in psychology that are directly related to criminal justice, such as substance abuse, behavior management, abnormal psychology, and crisis intervention. Our faculty will help you understand why criminals behave the way they do. With this knowledge, you can help shape the future of our criminal justice system for the better.
Learn about the historical, philosophical, and practical issues that impact criminal justice in America. In this program, you’ll have the chance to complete hands-on projects and use the knowledge gained in your courses to solve real-world problems.
Generous Discount for Active Duty Law Enforcement and Other First Responders
Liberty University is committed to providing world-class learning opportunities and helping students achieve their educational goals. The First Responder Discount was created to take some of the financial burdens of tuition off of the men and women who work in public service. If you are a firefighter, police officer, paramedic, or other first responder, we want to thank you for your service to our community by supporting you in your academic journey.
As Liberty’s way of saying “thank you,” we proudly provide first responders with the following benefits:
A 25% tuition discount
Potential college credit for training and life experience
Personalized service throughout your educational journey
Potential stacking with other tuition benefits like the Corporate Advantage Program or our Military Benefits
For more information on eligibility and claiming this discount, please visit the First Responder Discount page.
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s in Criminal Psychology Online Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online B.S. in Criminal Justice – Criminal Psychology degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
The courses in this program are only 8 weeks long with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
While completing this criminal justice degree, you’ll get to network with leaders, policymakers, and experts in criminal psychology from across the country.
As an online Liberty student, you can access a wide variety of resources through our top-notch research portal.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/homeland-security/","Request Info Apply Now
Residential B.S. in Criminal Justice: Homeland Security
The Bachelor of Science in Criminal Justice: Homeland Security prepares you for the frontline of a natural disaster or terrorist attack. You’ll learn how to prepare your community for critical incidents and ways to facilitate interagency cooperation.
Our professors have held leadership positions in homeland security and teach using hands-on activities to provide you with a practical understanding of terrorism, incident command, and infrastructure protection.
Learn How To:
Plan for, respond to, and recover from natural and man-made disasters
Coordinate staff and budgets from multiple agencies when responding to a critical incident
Understand the phases of a disaster
Academics: Homeland Security Cognate
Homeland Security Courses
Administration of Justice Organizations: CJUS 300
Introduction to Homeland Security: CJUS 380
Incident Command System: CJUS 381
Critical Infrastructure Protection: CJUS 382
Terrorism: GOVT 480
Law enforcement personnel who can document successful completion of an accredited police officer school in their state may earn up to 14 credit hours toward their degree. Military experience may also be evaluated for potential college credit.
Career Opportunities in Homeland Security
Emergency Management Specialist
Homeland Security Analyst
Industrial Security Specialist
Security Specialist
Transportation Security Officer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/homeland-security/","Protect and Serve the Nation with a Bachelor’s in Homeland Security
When natural and human-made hazards hit, the Department of Homeland Security is there to keep both lives and property safe. Liberty University’s online Bachelor of Science in Criminal Justice – Homeland Security degree can help you develop your professional skills and understand the delicate internal workings of the Department of Homeland Security. 
At Liberty, we have created our homeland security degree with your success in mind. You can gain the knowledge you need to work in a variety of careers in criminal justice, government, and homeland security. Designed to be completed in 4 years or less, this is more than an anti-terrorism degree online. You will gain broad foundational knowledge of the criminal justice system as well as other topics related to homeland security.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Homeland Security Bachelor’s Degree?
Are you looking for a career that will help you protect and serve your country? Liberty University’s homeland security degree program will help you make a difference in the lives of those affected by disasters and prevent terrorist attacks before they occur. Also, we strive to teach our programs from a Christian worldview and use the power of faith and education to transform people and the world.
Our homeland security degree program can help you stand out as an ethical and value-driven professional. Learn to serve your community and country with the skill set necessary to serve in security, disaster response, anti-terrorism, and intelligence.
What Can You Do with a Homeland Security Degree?
Americans living and working abroad have had systems and measures in place for their protection for a long time. After 9/11 happened, our government realized the need for a specialized agency that was dedicated to the protection of Americans here at home. The scope of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is quite broad. Still, the agency itself has a highly focused commitment to protecting us from human-made threats such as terrorism, natural disasters such as earthquakes, fires, and floods, and public health crises, which could be human-made or natural.
There are currently 22 departments and agencies which fall under the umbrella of DHS. Here are just a few of the areas you might be able to work for if you choose to pursue a career with DHS:
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
Transportation Security Administration (TSA)
U.S. Coast Guard
U.S. Customs and Border Protection
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
U.S. Secret Service
There are other agencies outside of DHS that handle domestic law enforcement and protection of lives and property such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Criminal Justice – Homeland Security Degree Program?
Liberty’s homeland security major can equip you with the skill set needed to protect your country and its citizens. Reviewing the history of terrorist threats and the United States’ strategic responses to those events can prepare you to react to future incidents. You will be introduced to emergency preparedness tactics, such as command arrangements, coordination, and budgetary issues seen among emergency responders.
Identifying what infrastructure are possible targets and how to protect them is another critical part of homeland security. This might include agriculture, cyber and information technology, telecommunications, transportation, energy, and emergency services. You will understand the importance and impact on both personal safety and the economic performance of the nation.
You will also develop an awareness of the effect of human influence and behavior on disaster response and recovery. Understanding the post-traumatic effects of various kinds of disasters can help prepare for all possibilities that can occur due to disaster warnings, civil unrest, evacuations, and a variety of other scenarios.
You will also gain a strong understanding of the internal workings of the criminal justice system and the legislation that created the laws we have today. Our online bachelor’s degree in criminal justice can prepare you to protect and serve your country with focused research, engaging classes, and preparedness strategies. 
Featured Courses
CJUS 380 – Introduction to Homeland Security
CJUS 381 – Incident Command System/Emergency Planning and Incident Management
CJUS 382 – Critical Infrastructure Protection
CJUS 420 – Criminal Investigations
Generous Discount for Active Duty Law Enforcement and Other First Responders
Liberty University is committed to providing world-class education and aims to help students achieve their educational goals, in whatever way we can. The First Responder Tuition Discount was created to take some of the financial burdens of tuition off the men and women who work in public service. For more information on eligibility and claiming this discount, please visit the First Responder Discount Page.
As Liberty University’s way of saying ‘Thank You,’ we proudly provide you with the following benefits:
A 25% tuition discount.
Opportunity for college credit for training and life experience.
Personalized service throughout your educational journey.
Potential stacking with other tuition benefits (Corporate Advantage Program or military benefits).
Benefits of Our Online Homeland Security Bachelor’s Degree Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online homeland security degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks will be provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our program ranked as one of the Best Online Homeland Security Degree Programs according to BestColleges.com!
As an online student, you will have the opportunity to network with leaders, policymakers, and experts in homeland security from across the country.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/juvenile-justice/","Request Info Apply Now
Residential B.S. in Criminal Justice: Juvenile Justice
The Bachelor of Science in Criminal Justice: Juvenile Justice prepares you for a career in juvenile corrections. You’ll study the internal workings of the criminal justice system and how it responds to juvenile delinquency, as you learn methods for establishing successful rehabilitation programs.
Our professors teach using hands-on activities to provide you with a practical understanding of community-based corrections, delinquency and crime prevention, and legal issues in the field.
Learn How To:
Analyze community-based corrections programs
Develop and implement strategies to prevent adult and juvenile crime
Work within the juvenile justice system
Academic: Juvenile Justice Cognate
Juvenile Justice Courses
Juvenile Justice: CJUS 310
Juvenile Corrections: CJUS 321
Community-Based Corrections: CJUS 322
Delinquency and Crime Prevention: CJUS 323
Legal and Ethical Issues in Juvenile Justice: CJUS 324
Law enforcement personnel who can document successful completion from an accredited police officer school in their state may earn up to 14 credit hours toward their degree. Military experience may also be evaluated for potential college credit.
Careers Opportunities in Juvenile Justice
Juvenile Justice Detention Officer
Juvenile Rehabilitation Coordinator
Probation Officer
Corrections recreation leader or program supervisor
Youth Correction Facility Director
Youth Services Coordinator
Deputy prison warden
Juvenile/youth counselor"
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/public-administration/","Request Info Apply Now
Residential B.S. in Criminal Justice: Public Administration Degree
The B.S. in Criminal Justice: Public Administration equips you to effectively manage people and resources for a local, state, or federal law enforcement agency.
You’ll learn to develop responses and offer solutions to complex situations. Our professors provide you with a practical understanding of public administration, criminal justice, and legal processes.
Learn How To:
Apply economic and management concepts in the government sector
Develop a budget for a police department or other government agency
Manage a municipal, state, or federal department
Academics: Public Administration Cognate
50%
Featured Courses
Administration of Justice Organizations (CJUS 300)
Introduction to Public Administration (PADM 360)
Public Finance and Budgeting (PADM 462)
Government Regulation of Business (GOVT 470)
Advanced Public Administration (PADM 475)
Law enforcement personnel who can document successful completion from an accredited police officer school in their state may earn up to 14 credit hours toward their degree. Military experience may also be evaluated for potential college credit.
Careers Opportunities in Public Administration
Corrections Facility Director
Criminal Justice Policy Advocate
Police Officer
Special Agent"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/juvenile-justice/","Help Change Lives with a Bachelor’s in Juvenile Justice Online Degree
Are you passionate about promoting peace and security? Do you want to understand the delicate internal workings of the juvenile justice system? Are you looking to make a positive impact on the youth in your community?
If that sounds like you, Liberty can help! Our 100% online Bachelor of Science in Criminal Justice – Juvenile Justice degree provides foundational training in juvenile delinquency and corrections. You’ll study core topics in criminal justice as well as learn how to work specifically with children and adolescents who have committed crimes.
Maybe you want to work in the field as a law enforcement officer, or perhaps you’d prefer a role in a juvenile detention center or program. Either way, Liberty can help you develop the skills needed to pursue a rewarding career and carry out justice at the local, state, and federal levels.
What is a juvenile justice specialist?
Juvenile justice specialists (or juvenile detention specialists)* work with delinquent youths who are in custody or on probation. They play a vital role in the juvenile justice system and fulfill many important responsibilities, such as:
Coordinating basic counseling services for youth offenders.
Overseeing behavior modification and discipline techniques for juvenile delinquents.
Planning work assignments and recreational activities in detention centers.
Protecting the safety and well-being of juvenile detainees and those around them.
Supervising juveniles in correctional programs or detention centers.
*This type of job may require a master’s degree. Our bachelor’s in criminal justice serves as an excellent stepping stone toward pursuing a graduate program, such as Liberty’s online M.S. in Criminal Justice!
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Juvenile Justice Courses?
At Liberty, we strive to live out Christ-like characteristics and to use the power of faith and education to transform the world. We don’t just offer college degrees — we seek to Train Champions for Christ and equip qualified professionals who can live out biblical principles in the workplace.
Whether you are currently serving in the juvenile justice system or looking to start a new career, our bachelor’s degree in juvenile justice can help you stand out as a Christ-centered, ethical, and value-driven professional. With this program, you can prepare to excel as a leader in courts, corrections, and policing.
Our juvenile justice degree is available 100% online, and the classes have no set login times. We offer the flexibility you need to achieve your academic goals without putting your life on hold. Additionally, you can complete this program in just 3.5 years! By earning your degree in less than the traditional 4 years, you can save money and start pursuing your career goals sooner.
Generous Discount for Active Duty Law Enforcement and Other First Responders
Liberty University is committed to providing world-class education and aims to help students achieve their educational goals, in whatever way we can. The First Responder Tuition Discount was created to take some of the financial burdens of tuition off the men and women who work in public service.
As Liberty University’s way of saying ‘Thank You,’ we proudly provide you with the following benefits:
A 25% tuition discount
Opportunity for college credit for training and life experience
Personalized service throughout your educational journey
Potential stacking with other tuition benefits (Corporate Advantage Program or Military Benefits)
For more information on eligibility and claiming this discount, please visit the First Responder Discount page.
What Will You Learn in Our Youth Justice Courses?
Liberty’s online juvenile justice degree dives into the historical, philosophical, and practical issues that have shaped America’s criminal justice system. In this program, you’ll study under professors who have years of experience in the classroom and courtroom, as well as directly in the field.
Our core courses introduce a variety of important topics, such as criminology, the judicial process, terrorism, criminal law, and constitutional criminal procedure. You can also learn how to research and write case briefings, formal reports, and memoranda. Our goal is to help strengthen your leadership, problem-solving, and conflict resolution skills so you can serve effectively in your desired career field.
With our juvenile justice specialization, you can customize your degree and further hone your skill set. You’ll analyze various correctional measures that are used with criminals, such as electronic monitoring, boot camps, and restorative justice programs. In addition to exploring intervention strategies, you’ll learn about methods for preventing crime.
Other topics of study include:
Factors that negatively affect children and adolescents and cause delinquency, such as individual traits, broken homes, and peer pressure.
Legal and ethical issues surrounding the juvenile justice system.
Methods for controlling and preventing juvenile delinquency.
The use of punishment to promote rehabilitation, deterrence, incapacitation, and/or retribution.
Featured Courses
CJUS 321 – Juvenile Corrections
CJUS 322 – Community Based Corrections
CJUS 323 – Delinquency and Crime Prevention
CJUS 324 – Legal and Ethical Issues in Juvenile Justice
Highlights of Liberty University’s Juvenile Justice Classes
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online bachelor’s degree in criminal justice – juvenile justice from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You will have the opportunity to network with leaders, policymakers, and experts in the criminal justice field from across the country.
Our juvenile justice program is available in a 100% online, 8-week course format.
Earn your degree in as little as 3.5 years!
If you are seeking a child protection and juvenile justice degree, this program can help you prepare to work with children and adolescents in the criminal justice system."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/public-administration/","Support and Serve Your Community with a Bachelor’s Degree in Criminal Justice – Public Administration
Are you in search of a degree program that combines your interest in law enforcement and corrections with training in government and the public sector? Maybe a criminal justice administration degree is the focus of your search, but you also see a benefit to taking public administration courses. Perhaps you are looking for a degree that you can use to work at a federal agency, like the Department of Justice. If so, Liberty’s BS in Criminal Justice – Public Administration may be for you!
Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science in Criminal Justice – Public Administration degree can set you on a path to success by helping you develop your professional and managerial skills. Our online bachelor’s degree in criminal justice management – public administration was created to provide you with a strong foundation in the skills necessary to succeed in criminal justice and government positions.
Designed to be completed in 4 years or less, Liberty’s BS in Criminal Justice – Public Administration degree is offered completely online, giving you the ability to remain active in your job and your community without the worry of having to take courses on campus.
Why Choose Liberty’s Criminal Justice and Public Administration Degree?
Our online degree in public administration and criminal justice seeks to prepare students for careers of service at police departments and varying levels of government. At Liberty University, we strive to produce Christ-centered graduates who are equipped with the knowledge and skills needed to impact the world.
If you are looking for a degree that can prepare you to work in public administration or criminal justice, our online criminal justice and public administration bachelor’s degree can help you stand out as an ethical and value-driven professional. Partner with Liberty and become a force for positive change in the criminal justice system — someone who is capable of shaping the policies that govern correctional facilities and law enforcement agencies.
What Will You Learn in Liberty’s Criminal Justice and Public Administration Bachelor’s Degree?
Throughout this program, you can become equipped with the tools you need to strengthen your leadership and public administration skills. Additionally, you can gain an understanding of social issues and strategies for facilitating needed change in criminal justice systems. Lastly, you will become familiar with the content of specific laws, rules, and regulations imposed by government agencies on the private sector.
In our online criminal justice administration bachelor’s degree program, you can learn from professors with real-world experience who want you to succeed. Our professors will help you develop skills in administration, public finances, and service-oriented leadership. Through our online criminal justice administration courses, you can be prepared to lead with confidence.
Generous Discount for Active Duty Law Enforcement and Other First Responders
Liberty University is committed to providing world-class education and aims to help students achieve their educational goals in whatever way we can. The First Responder Tuition Discount was created to ease some of the financial burdens for the men and women who work in public service.
As Liberty University’s way of saying ‘Thank You,’ we proudly provide you with the following benefits:
A 25% tuition discount
Potential college credit for training and life experience
Personalized service throughout your educational journey
Potential stacking with other tuition benefits (Corporate Advantage Program or military benefits)
Featured Courses
CJUS 330 – Judicial Process
GOVT 470 – Government Regulation of Business
PADM 462 – Public Finance and Budgeting
Highlights of Our Online BS in Criminal Justice – Public Administration Degree Program 
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online criminal justice degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
As an online student, you will have the opportunity to network with leaders, policymakers, and experts in public administration from across the country.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/accounting/","Learn and Practice Biblical Stewardship with an Online Accounting and Data Analysis Degree 
We are called to be good stewards in all that we do — including how we do business. Businesses need to use their resources wisely and with discernment. By earning a bachelor’s in accounting and data analysis, you can equip yourself to successfully steward the finances of an organization and become an integral member of any company.
Earning a Bachelor of Science in Accounting and Data Analysis can help open the door to new positions in corporate, government, nonprofit, or even consulting settings. Many accounting professionals also specialize in a specific industry or a specific skill set. You could pursue a career as a public or private accountant, credit or budget analyst, or as an auditor or financial planner. A bachelor’s in accounting and data analysis can help provide you with a variety of career avenues to explore as you seek to apply your passion for good stewardship to your profession.
By teaching you the critical, basic skills to succeed in almost any accounting field, our online bachelor’s in accounting degree can help you pursue a variety of career paths. At Liberty, you can learn to analyze an organization’s financial practices, assist with risk analysis, and develop plans for future needs of the company. An accounting degree online can also help prepare you for management roles as a consultant and financial expert. 
For information about becoming licensed as a Certified Public Accountant (CPA), please research the CPA Licensure Requirements for your state.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Job Outlook for Bachelor’s in Accounting and Data Analysis Degree Online Graduates
Not only does the accounting industry offer a variety of career paths, but it is also a growing and financially rewarding career field. The Bureau of Labor Statistics predicts a 7% job growth for the accounting industry between 2020 and 2030,* and the median pay for accounting professionals is $73,560 a year.**
With a high earning potential, increased demand within the industry, and a multitude of diverse opportunities within the field, now is the time to pursue your passion for becoming an accountant. By earning your online accounting degree through Liberty University, you can graduate with valued skills for the current economy.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Accounting and Data Analysis Degree?
As a pioneer in distance education since 1985, we understand what it takes to design an online accounting degree that can challenge you to grasp new concepts while respecting your personal commitments. At Liberty, we realize your personal commitments don’t stop when you pursue a degree — which is why our online accounting degree can be completed 100% online with no set login times and no required intensives. 
Our online data analysis and accounting courses are also offered in a convenient, 8-week format — allowing you to complete your degree in a shorter timeframe than a degree comprised of semester-long courses may permit. You don’t want to wait your entire life to pursue your career goals, and we understand that. At Liberty, we are committed to helping you earn your degree at a pace that works for you — all while maintaining the highest educational quality. 
Liberty University is passionate about your success, which is why we are excited to offer you a respected accounting degree online. Our Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP) accredited bachelor’s in accounting online is ranked as one of the Best Online Bachelor’s in Accounting by BestColleges.com.
With Liberty’s online bachelor’s in accounting and data analysis, you get the flexibility of an online curriculum without sacrificing the student-faculty relationship. Our carefully designed curriculum is taught by business professionals who have real-world experience in the private and public sectors.
Throughout this degree program, you can learn critical accounting principles and best practices — from taxation laws to auditing and analysis. You can also develop the communication and computer application skills needed to work with complex accounting issues. Most importantly — and unlike other online accounting degrees — our biblical focus can help you learn to identify, analyze, and appropriately handle ethical dilemmas.
The benefits of our industry-leading curriculum, expert faculty, and 100% online format allow you to gain the skills needed to flourish in data analysis and accounting roles. With Liberty University’s BS in Accounting and Data Analysis, you can be confident in your ability to succeed as an accounting professional.
By studying online, you can earn your data analysis and accounting degree at your own pace and stay active in your job, your community, and your family without the worry of scheduling on-campus courses. The time has never been better to pursue an online degree, and at Liberty, it has never been simpler to get started. Partner with us, learn valuable skills, and launch your accounting career. 
Certified Public Accountant (CPA) Certification
As you work through the courses within our online data analysis and accounting degree, you can develop analytical and communication skills that can prepare you to sit for certifications like the Certified Public Accountant (CPA). As additional requirements may be needed to receive CPA certification, we encourage students to contact their state board with questions about these additional requirements. You can also speak with one of our admissions counselors for additional information by calling (800) 424-9595.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Accountants and auditors: Job outlook, 2021 (viewed online Nov. 19, 2021). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
**Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Accountants and auditors: Pay, 2021 (viewed online Nov. 19, 2021). Cited pay may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth."
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/accounting-data-analysis/","Residential Accounting & Data Analysis Program
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Accounting and Data Analysis program prepares students to be effective leaders in business. The program develops proficiency in communication and computer application skills needed to work with complex accounting issues. Students also learn to identify, analyze, and appropriately deal with ethical dilemmas from a sound moral and biblical perspective.
In addition to the required core classes on the degree completion plan, each student is required to complete various core classes that specialize in accounting.
View the CPA Licensure Requirements
Student Testimonial – Hear My Story
Featured Accounting Courses
Cost Accounting I (ACCT 311)
Accounting Information Systems (ACCT 332)
Taxation I (ACCT 401)
Advanced Accounting (ACCT 402)
Govt. and Not-for-Profit Accounting (ACCT 403)
Auditing (ACCT 404)
Career Opportunities in Accounting and Data Analysis
Accounting Clerk
Accounting Payable Clerk
Accounting Representative
Accounting Manager"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/acting-bfa/","BFA in Acting
Residential Acting Program
Prepare for a career in theatre through the Bachelor of Fine Arts in Acting program at Liberty University. Develop your craft by focusing on a variety of acting styles and periods as well as stage combat, movement, and dialects and accents.
Beyond the classroom, you’ll hone your expertise by taking advantage of the many on-campus opportunities available. Six academic shows are produced each year between the Tower Theater and The Box Theater. You will also have the opportunity to audition for the professional arm of the department, the Alluvion Stage Company, which produces one to two shows each season.
Liberty University is also an active participant in:
Kennedy Center American College Theatre Festival (KCACTF)
Virginia Theatre Association (VTA)
Southeastern Theatre Conference (SETC)
For complete information on the BFA in Acting, including academic requirements, policies, and procedures see the BFA Handbook.
Academics: BFA in Acting
Credit Hours
120 total credit hours
Degree Completion Plan (DCP)
Acting (BFA) DCP
Admission Requirements
Students will need to complete a BFA audition and be accepted by the Performance Faculty into the BFA Acting program. Students are given two opportunities to pass the audition to be accepted into the program. (Visit the BFA Entrance Auditions page for audition dates and requirements.)
View Liberty’s undergraduate admissions requirements
Acting Courses
Acting for Film I and II (THEA 311 and THEA 313)
Christian Aesthetics in Theatre (THEA 381)
Period Styles I and II (THEA 471 and THEA 473)
Stage Accents (THEA 441)
Stage Combat I and II (THEA 421 and THEA 423)
Stage Movement I and II (THEA 321 and THEA 323)
For a complete list of required courses, please see the BFA in Acting Degree Completion Plan.
Get Started with Your Degree"
"https://www.liberty.edu/aeronautics/bachelors/commercial-corporate/","BS in Aeronautics: Commercial/Corporate
Residential Aeronautics: Commercial/Corporate Program
Prepare for a career in the airlines or in corporate aviation. Through our Bachelor of Science in Aeronautics: Commercial/Corporate, you will gain the expertise, leadership skills, and strong Christian character you need to help you succeed in your career.
As students continue to pursue the Commercial/Corporate and Global Studies degrees, we will consistently strive to create graduates with technical competence and prepare men and women of character.
Create graduates with technical competence: Through a combination of both classroom and flight training, you will acquire the following certificates and ratings during your degree program: FAA Airplane Pilot ratings for Private, Instrument, and Commercial Single and Multi-Engine Land. Through elective course options, you may also achieve your Certified Flight Instructor certificate, Certified Flight Instructor – Instrument and Multi-Engine Instructor certificates.
Prepare men and women of character: The purpose of the Commercial/Corporate degree program is to prepare you to become an exceptional aviator, who possesses outstanding knowledge, excellent technical skills, sound judgment, professionalism, leadership, and strong Christian character.
In addition, once you complete the commercial/corporate concentration, you can apply for the few certified flight instructor opportunities available. If selected, you can serve as an instructor with Liberty University’s program to build the flying hours required to qualify for an airline or corporate pilot job.
Over the next 20 years, more than 630,000 new airline pilots will be needed worldwide. Liberty has partnered with various airline and corporate companies that seek our graduates because of their skills, values, and professionalism.
Student Achievement Data
Simulation Training Opportunities at Liberty University
Academic Information
Courses You Could Take
Instrument Flight (AVIA 320)
Commercial Flight II (AVIA 324)
Multi-Engine Flight (AVIA 440)
Benefits
FAA Part 141 Flight Instruction
Financial Aid Available
Post-9/11 GI Bill® & Yellow Ribbon Available
Regional Airline Hiring Agreements
Restricted “Reduced-Hour” Airline Transport Pilot Program
Accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges
Start Your Career in Aviation
Important Information
Costs & Financial Aid
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government Web site at https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/aeronautics/bachelors/global-studies/","Residential Aeronautics: Global Studies Program
Prepare to serve as a pilot for faith-based aviation organizations. Through the B.S. in Aeronautics: Global Studies, you will gain the knowledge, leadership skills, and strong Christian character you need to succeed in your role.
As students continue to pursue the Global Studies degrees we will consistently strive to create graduates with technical competence and prepare men and women of character.
Create graduates with technical competence: Through a combination of both classroom and flight training, you will acquire the following certificates and ratings during your degree program: FAA Airplane Pilot ratings for Private, Instrument, and Commercial Single and Multi-Engine Land. Through elective course options, you may also achieve your Certified Flight Instructor certificate, Certified Flight Instructor – Instrument, and Multi-Engine Instructor certificates.
Prepare men and women of character: The purpose of the Global Studies degree program is to prepare you to become an exceptional aviator, who possesses outstanding knowledge, excellent technical skills, sound judgment, professionalism, leadership, and strong Christian character.
In the School of Aeronautics, you also have the opportunity to earn an aircraft maintenance certificate to serve as a mechanic as well as a pilot.
As we seek to fulfill the Great Commission, there is a great need for pilots and mechanics with a heart to serve in the mission field.
Student Achievement Data
Simulation Training Opportunities at Liberty University
Academic Information
Courses You Could Take
Commercial Flight II (AVIA 326)
Aviation Human Factors (AVIA 400)
Confined Area Operations (AVIA 450)
Benefits
FAA Part 141 Flight Instruction
Financial Aid Available
Post-9/11 GI Bill® & Yellow Ribbon Available
Regional Airline Hiring Agreements
Restricted “Reduced-Hour” Airline Transport Pilot Program
Accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges
Start Your Career in Aviation
Important Information
Costs & Financial Aid
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government Web site at https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/aeronautics/bachelors/military/","BS in Aeronautics: Military
Residential Aeronautics: Military Concentration Program
Pursue a career as a pilot in military services including active duty, reserve, and National Guard forces as well as Air Force and Army ROTC. Through the Bachelor of Science in Aeronautics: Military concentration, you will gain the knowledge, leadership skills, and strong Christian character you need to succeed in your role.
As students pursue the Military degree, we strive to create graduates with technical competence and prepare men and women of character.
Create graduates with technical competence: Through a combination of both classroom and flight training, you will acquire the following certificates and ratings during your degree program: FAA Airplane Pilot ratings for Private and Instrument during their degree program.
Prepare men and women of character: The purpose of the Military degree program is to prepare you to become exceptional aviators who possess outstanding knowledge, excellent technical skills, sound judgment, professionalism, leadership, and strong Christian character. These qualities will prepare you to serve in the U.S. military.
The U.S. military needs pilots who possess outstanding character and leadership skills. At Liberty University School of Aeronautics, you will be mentored by faculty who served our nation in careers as military leaders and pilots.
Note: this program is not a military pilot commissioning ascension program. For more information on military pilot commissioning ascension, you must contact Air Force ROTC or Army ROTC.
Student Achievement Data
Simulation Training Opportunities at Liberty University
Academic Information
Courses You Could Take
Introduction of Space Flight (AVIA 250)
Aviation Leadership (AVIA 245)
Airplane Aerodynamics (AVIA 305)
Instrument Flight (AVIA 320)
Start Your Career in Aviation
Benefits
FAA Part 141 Flight Instruction
Financial Aid Available
Post-9/11 GI Bill® & Yellow Ribbon Available
Regional Airline Hiring Agreements
Restricted “Reduced-Hour” Airline Transport Pilot Program
Accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges
Important Information
Costs & Financial Aid
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government Web site at https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/applied-mathematics-statistics/","Residential Program in Applied Mathematics & Statistics (B.S.)
The B.S. in Applied Mathematics and Statistics offers you a four-course statistics sequence with an emphasis on applied courses. Get a solid foundation for graduate school or flexible career options in finance, industry, government, and more with your Applied Mathematics and Statistics degree from Liberty University.
This degree is offered through the Department of Mathematics.
Academics for the Applied Mathematics and Statistics Degree
Featured Applied Math & Statistics Courses
Applied Linear Algebra (MATH 221)
Probability & Statistics I & II (MATH 311, 411)
Intro. to Experimental Design in Statistics (MATH 302)
Abstract Algebra (MATH 421)
Real Analysis (MATH 431)
Start Your Career in Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Mathematics and Statistics Career Opportunities
Operations Research Analyst
Associate Data Scientist
Actuary
Investment Analyst
Federal Government
Industry 
Manufacturing
Logistics
Software Development
Pharmaceuticals"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/american-sign-language-and-interpreting/","Residential Program in American Sign Language and Interpreting
The field of interpreting is experiencing exponential growth, and skilled professional interpreters are in demand.
Our Bachelor of Arts in American Sign Language and Interpreting program will equip you with the knowledge and skillset to bridge communication and cultural gaps as an effective professional ASL/English interpreter.
The initial two years consist of general education courses and language learning (ASL):
general education courses
development of linguistic (American Sign Language) and cultural competencies related to the Deaf community
Introduction to the interpreting profession

In the final two years, students will…
synthesize the interpreting skillset by first working on intralingual cognitive processes which they will build into interlingual practice.
complete the Virginia Quality Assurance Screening (VQAS) with the goal of being qualified interpreters in the state of Virginia and other regions sharing reciprocity
participate in interpreting Practicum and Internship, which may include working with the university’s own interpreting services agency (Liberty University Interpreting Services), the university’s Washington Fellowship, or at various locations nationwide

Throughout the entire program, students will….
apply a biblical worldview to linguistic, cultural, and ethical studies
gains community partnership through our American Sign Language Club and ASL Honor Society
demonstrate professionalism both in class and in the field through composure, appearance, and professional/ethical interactions
This degree is offered through the Department of Modern Languages.
Academic Information for the Social Sciences Major
ASL Courses You Could Take
ASLI 101: American Sign Language I
ASLI 212: Theory and Application of Fingerspelling and Numbers
ASLI 310: Deaf Studies
ASLI 405: ASL Linguistics
Start Your Career 
Career Opportunities for American Sign Language and Interpreting Majors
Educational interpreting
Video relay services
Corporate Interpreting
Freelance Interpreting"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/applied-mathematics-statistics/actuarial/","Residential Actuarial Mathematics, Applied Mathematics & Statistics (B.S.)
Get a strong foundation for a promising career in a wide variety of industries with the B.S. Applied Mathematics & Statistics – Actuarial degree from Liberty University.
Gain skills in key industry areas such as business, computer science, accounting, and economics while you prepare for the Society of Actuaries (SOA) exams and get Validation by Educational Experience (VEE) credit. Additionally, the Actuarial Club helps to prepare you for actuarial exams and acts as a channel of communication with recruiters.
Our students often step into entry-level actuarial positions upon graduation.
This degree is offered through the Department of Mathematics.
Academics: Actuarial Mathematics, Applied Mathematics & Statistics Degree
Featured Actuarial Mathematics & Statistics Courses
Financial Mathematics (MATH 304)
Probability & Statistics II (MATH 411)
Corporate Finance (BUSI 320)
Principles of Microeconomics (ECON 213)
Start Your Career in Actuarial Mathematics
Actuarial Mathematics Career Opportunities
Actuary
Business Analyst
Investment Analyst
Underwriter
Risk Analyst
Industries 
manufacturing
logistics
finance
data science
software development
pharmaceuticals"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/aeronautics/bachelors/aviation/","Soar to New Heights with Liberty’s Online Aviation Degree
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Aviation online program focuses on the practical aeronautical decision-making skills you’ll need for a fulfilling career as a commercial, military, or missionary pilot.
Liberty University has the largest flight school in Virginia, so you can be confident you will be studying under professors who possess superior knowledge and experience in the field while pursuing your degree in aviation online. And at Liberty, you’ll not only gain the technical skills and knowledge you need to succeed in the field of aeronautics, but you’ll also learn the following soft skills desired by the aviation industry and mission aviation organizations that can set you apart from your peers:
Character
Critical thinking and problem-solving skills
Leadership and team-building skills
Oral and written communication skills
Professionalism 
How Can Liberty Offer an Online Aviation Degree? 
Liberty University is able to offer a Bachelor of Science in Aviation degree online because each aviation student must either come into the program as a licensed pilot or earn a pilot’s license through one of Liberty University’s approved Flight Training Affiliates (FTAs).*
You can receive college credit for your licenses and certifications through our Experience Plus program.
If you do not have a pilot’s license, Liberty’s FTAs are conveniently located around the country, giving you the flexibility to complete the necessary flight hours for a pilot’s license without needing to come to our campus in Virginia. 
Liberty University’s School of Aeronautics is the 2017, 2018, and 2019 recipient of the Loening Trophy, one of the rarest and oldest collegiate aviation awards, for being the outstanding all-around collegiate aviation program in the nation.
See the Aviation Scholarships page to see if you could be eligible for aviation training related benefits!
The flight requirements for earning your aviation degree online can be fulfilled by submitting a copy of your pilot’s license to petition for credit through our Experience Plus program or opting to enroll at one of our Flight Training Affiliate locations. 
*Military benefits from the Veterans Administration are not accepted at this time on flight and ground courses. (VA benefits can be used for other classes.)
Why Liberty’s Online Aviation Degree?
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC), and our School of Aeronautics has won the Loening Trophy, one of the rarest and oldest collegiate aviation awards, for being the outstanding all-around collegiate aviation program in the nation 3 years in a row!
Additionally, the School of Aeronautics has established strong relationships with numerous airlines across the United States. Through this partnership, we have signed partnerships with several major airlines for students who complete Liberty University’s aviation program.
Your Liberty education can help you stand out in your field. Our courses integrate a Christian worldview with aviation industry best practices, so we can help instill and develop strong airmanship in our students. Good airmanship encompasses the discipline, leadership skills, and character needed to excel in any aviation profession. You’ll be mentored in these areas as well as educated on the skills and knowledge you need to safely and efficiently operate and maintain air vehicles. You will not only be able to understand the fundamentals of flying, but also you can gain an understanding of how your aircraft works through this online aviation degree.
Liberty’s exciting online aviation degree seeks to produce quality candidates who are able to exercise expert knowledge in their field. The goal of this pilot degree program is to equip you for complete career preparedness and provide you with the knowledge you need to confidently understand the mechanics of flight and become a successful pilot.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Aviation Degree?
You will be trained with practical and applicable knowledge in airplane aerodynamics and instrument panel controls.
You’ll learn the fundamentals of aeronautics, GPS navigation, and aviation safety as well as aviation weather and the workings of turbine engines. 
You will have the ability to train under experienced leaders in the field of aviation.
You’ll go through a challenging and rewarding curriculum developed by the largest flight school in Virginia while pursuing an online aviation degree.
You may have the opportunity to participate in the Restricted Airline Transport Pilot (R-ATP) Program. 
By training with respected and experienced leaders in the field of aviation, you’ll not only study flight but also be prepared for flight!
Online Aviation Degree Program Benefits 
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
BestColleges.com put Liberty’s programs in the top 10 for their 2021 Best Online Bachelor’s in Aeronautics and Aviation award.
If you are entering the field of aviation for the first time, you can complete this degree in as little as 3.5 years. If you have experience as a pilot, transfer credit may allow you to complete this program in just 2.5 years.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/applied-ministry/","Diversify Your Skill Set and Become a Valuable Asset to Any Ministry
Are you excited about being a part of a ministry but wonder how you can incorporate your personal interests and talents into your career? You need a degree that combines biblical training with secular subjects – a degree that can hone your skills and make you a valued member of any ministry. With Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Applied Ministry, you can take your passion for ministry and combine it with nearly any subject!
Our applied ministry program is unique because it provides you with the basic knowledge and skills you’ll need to work in churches, parachurches, and nonprofit organizations. However, you also have the option to choose a unique subject in divinity and up to 2 additional subjects to study. You could learn about business, fine arts, aviation, health sciences, and more. These subjects give you the opportunity to build additional, marketable skills so you can do more in your profession and for the Kingdom of God.
What Is Applied Ministry?
Applied ministry is not necessarily a ministry category (like teaching or counseling ministries), but rather the capacity and experience to apply biblical, theological, and formational constructs and strategies to a ministry or vocational setting. Through applied ministry, you can gain the practical skills and knowledge needed to help expand the Kingdom and make a positive impact in whatever field you choose to pursue. 
Why Choose Liberty University’s Ministry Degree?
Choosing a degree that meets all of your needs as a student and as a professional can be a challenge. But with Liberty’s applied ministry degree, you can pursue a degree that aligns with your unique goals. Here’s what this program can offer you:
Flexibility | Each of your courses is offered in a 100% online, 8-week format with 8 different start dates throughout the year. You can complete your coursework and your program at your own pace.
Integrity | Our mission is Training Champions for Christ. We work to live out that mission in all that we do. Our coursework is taught from a Christian perspective, and our professors are dedicated to praying for your personal, academic, and spiritual success.
Personalized Courses | With this program, you will choose up to 3 unique areas of interest plus free elective courses – allowing you to customize your program to your career goals and ministry needs.
Resources Beyond Ministry | While other programs may offer you the chance to study different aspects of ministry and related subjects, Liberty allows you to leverage resources outside of divinity. Business, aviation, music, and many more subject areas are available to you. Broaden your college experience and apply your knowledge of ministry to many other areas as you explore a wide range of educational opportunities.
What Will You Learn in Our Applied Ministry Degree?
Our applied ministry program can prepare you for a variety of positions within ministry and secular settings. In addition to core subjects like English, math, and philosophy, you will take divinity, business, and counseling courses. These will provide you with a well-rounded foundation of knowledge and transferrable skills that you can use in nearly any field.
Throughout this program, you can learn how to combine diverse ministry practices and principles that elevate the gospel and equip you to honor God no matter your vocation. Our program allows you to choose up to 3 unique areas of study so you can personalize your program to your professional goals.
Upon graduation, you will be able to:
Apply key principles, skills, and strategies necessary for ministry implementation and management.
Articulate and biblically justify essential truths of evangelical Christianity.
Understand how different fields of study contribute to the work of gospel-centered ministry.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information!
Featured Courses
BIBL 360 – Methodical Study of Scripture
RLGN 301 – Research and Writing for Religious Disciplines
RLGN 360 – Practical Teaching of Scripture
THEO 360 – Biblical Theology
Areas of Study for the B.S. in Applied Ministry
In your applied ministry degree, you will choose areas of study based on your interests, career goals, and ministry needs. You are required to choose 2 areas of interest, and you have the option to add a third.
Area of Study 1 – Divinity (Required)
Area of Study 2 – Non-Divinity (Required)
Find out more about the specific courses available in each area of study!
Highlights of Our B.S. in Applied Ministry Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all online undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You could complete your B.S. in Applied Ministry in as little as 3.5 years!
With so many areas of interest and courses to choose from, you can personalize your degree to fit your career goals and the needs of your ministry. This interdisciplinary ministry degree can allow you to explore what interests you and develop skills beyond ministry.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/aeronautics/bachelors/aviation-administration-safety-management/","Residential Aviation Safety Management Program
Pursue a career as a professional aviation administrator. With a Bachelor of Science in Aviation Administration: Aviation Safety Management, you will develop the skills of program development, data analysis, and ethical decision-making.
As students pursue the Aviation Administration degree, we strive to create graduates with technical competence and prepare men and women of character.
Create graduates with technical competence: The Aviation Administration degree program is designed to prepare you for careers in the aviation industry, including positions in airport management, airline operations, aircraft manufacturing and sales, government and non-government organizations, aviation safety, missions’ aviation organizations, and operations, etc. The program also prepares you for roles in safety management systems and exposes you to data analysis, which are areas desired by the industry.
Prepare men and women of character: The Aviation Administration program builds on the School of Aeronautics’ aviation safety and leadership core, providing you with knowledge and skills needed for program development, data analysis, organizational management, and ethics for service as leadership and managerial functions in various aviation business and operations roles. As an aviation professional, you will possess sound judgment and strong Christian character.
Student Achievement Data
Careers You Could Have
Airport operations
Airline operations
Aircraft manufacture & sales
Aviation business
Mission aviation management
Government & non-profit aviation organizations
Academic Information
Courses You Could Take
Aviation Safety Programs (AVIA 312)
Principles of Aviation Administration (AVIA 314)
Airport Management (AVIA 360)
Benefits
Financial Aid Available
Post-9/11 GI Bill® & Yellow Ribbon Available
Accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges
Start Your Career in Aviation
Important Information
Costs & Financial Aid
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government Web site at https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/aeronautics/bachelors/aviation-administration-flight/","Residential Aviation Administration: Flight Program
Pursue a career as a professional aviation administrator. With a Bachelor of Science in Aviation Administration: Flight, you will earn your Private Pilot license as part of the course credits required.
As students pursue the Aviation Administration degree, we strive to create graduates with technical competence and prepare men and women of character.
Create graduates with technical competence: The Aviation Administration degree program is designed to prepare you for careers in the aviation industry, including positions in airport management, airline operations, aircraft manufacturing and sales, government and non-government organizations, aviation safety, missions’ aviation organizations, and operations, etc. The program also prepares you for roles in safety management systems and exposes you to data analysis, which are areas desired by the industry.
Prepare men and women of character: The Aviation Administration program builds on the School of Aeronautics’ aviation safety and leadership core, providing you with knowledge and skills needed for program development, data analysis, organizational management, and ethics for service as leadership and managerial functions in various aviation business and operations roles. As an aviation professional, you will possess sound judgment and strong Christian character.
Student Achievement Data
Prepare for a successful career in:
Airport operations
Mission aviation management
Aircraft marketing & sales
Aviation business
Airline operations & administration
Government & non-profit aviation organizations
Academic Information
Courses You Could Take
Private Pilot Flight II (AVIA 225)
Principles of Aviation Administration (AVIA 314)
Airport Management (AVIA 360)
Benefits
FAA Part 141 Flight Instruction
Financial Aid Available
Post-9/11 GI Bill® & Yellow Ribbon Available
Accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges
Start Your Career in Aviation
Important Information
Costs & Financial Aid
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government Web site at https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/aeronautics/bachelors/aviation-maintenance/management/","Residential Aviation Maintenance: Management Program
Expand your Aviation Maintenance Technician School (A&P) training for FAA aviation mechanic licensure with your Bachelor of Science in Aviation Maintenance: Management. 
This degree builds on and strengthens the fundamental skills and principles taught during your AMTS training. Here, you’ll explore broader topics facing an FAA licensed mechanic such as Human Factors and Safety. The Management Cognate gives you the skills to serve in leadership and management positions in an aviation maintenance business.
As students pursue the Aviation Maintenance degree, we strive to create graduates with technical competence and prepare men and women of character.
Create graduates with technical competence: LUSOA operates a 14 CFR Part 147 Aircraft Maintenance school for FAA Airframe and Powerplant certification. The curriculum expands on the School of Aeronautics AMTS (A&P) training for FAA aviation mechanic licensure. It builds on, and strengthens, fundamental skills and principles taught during the AMTS training and delves into broader topics facing an FAA licensed mechanic such as Human Factors and Safety. The FAA certification portion of this program (all AVMT courses) is designed to be completed in 12-consecutive months. The program is specifically suited to prepare you for the mission aviation field as maintainers and as pilot-maintainers. Program elements include turbojet training. In addition, students in UAS maintenance have the option of participating in Textron Systems partnership training to receive industry certification as an Aerosonde maintenance crew chief.
Prepare men and women of character: The purpose of the Aviation Maintenance degree program is to prepare you for management and leadership roles in the aviation maintenance field with outstanding knowledge, excellent technical skills, sound judgment, and strong Christian character.
Student Achievement Data
With this degree, you will earn your FAA mechanic certification with both Airframe and Powerplant rating.
Benefits
Accelerated 12-month FAA Part 147 Maintenance Training
Financial Aid Available
Post-9/11 GI Bill® & Yellow Ribbon Available
Onsite FAA testing
Accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges
Start Your Career in Aviation
Important Information
Costs & Financial Aid
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government Web site at https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/aeronautics/bachelors/aviation-maintenance/unmanned-aerial-systems/","Residential Program
Prepare to become a leader in the rapidly growing Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) industry. With the Bachelor of Science in Aviation Maintenance: Unmanned Aerial Systems, you will receive the technical training and leadership skills to support UAS operations around the world. In this program, you will earn your FAA Airframe and Powerplant certificates as well as your UAS crew chief certification through a training partnership with Textron Systems.
As students pursue the UAS degree, we strive to create graduates with technical competence and prepare men and women of character.
Create graduates with technical competence: Through a combination of both classroom and flight training, you will acquire the following certificates and ratings during your degree program: FAA Airplane Pilot ratings for Private and Instrument; FAR Part 107 certification; medium UAS certification.
Prepare men and women of character: The purpose of the UAS degree program is to prepare you to impact the UAS industry with world class knowledge, skills, and abilities. As an aviation professional, you will possess sound judgment and strong Christian character.
Student Achievement Data
Academic Information
Courses You Could Take
UAS Avionics and Powerplants (AVIA 323)
Medium UAS Maintenance (AVMX 445)
Principles of Troubleshooting (AVMX 418)
Benefits
FAA Part 141 Flight Instruction
Financial Aid Available
Post-9/11 GI Bill® & Yellow Ribbon Available
Regional Airline Hiring Agreements
Restricted “Reduced-Hour” Airline Transport Pilot Program
Accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges
Start Your Career in Aviation
Important Information
Costs & Financial Aid
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government Web site at https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/aeronautics/bachelors/aviation/aviation-maintenance-management/","Error 404
We’re sorry, that page doesn’t exist.
Try searching our website or exploring one of the additional options below.
Additional Options"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/aeronautics/bachelors/aviation-management/","Soar to New Heights in Your Career with a Bachelor of Science in Aviation Management Degree Online
Are you interested in aviation without a desire to be a pilot? Do you have passion for business and helping a company succeed? Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science (BS) in Aviation Management degree online can help your career take off. 
Our online bachelor’s degree combines principles of aviation with a business administration. This unique approach provides you with marketable management and communication skills that can set you apart in the field of aeronautics. 
Airlines, aircraft manufacturers, government agencies, and many other organizations in the aviation industry need managers and executives. Competitive candidates have a background in flight operations and possess advanced business skills. Liberty’s undergraduate aviation management online degree is designed to help you fill this need.
Our degree allows you to develop a working knowledge of aircraft regulations, aviation technologies, aviation safety programs, and aviation management concepts. With this flexible degree, you can pursue many different career options.
Our program includes aviation management courses that can get you started on an airport or aviation management career path. Liberty’s aviation business degree program offer flexibility and affordability that provide you with a world class education. If you want to pursue airport management or airline management, this degree can help equip you. Whether you are a pilot or not, a airport management degree online can set you apart. 
Liberty’s online aviation management degree can help you enter the professional world. Our program helps prepare you for a rewarding career in a growing field without traveling to a flight school or campus. With the built-in flexibility of free electives and transfer credit, Liberty’s BS in Aviation Management shines above other programs. 
We believe our program is one of the best online degree programs in aviation available today. We help you make the most out of your previous flight experience and maintenance training through transfer credits. This degree can help you get started or specialize your previous education to further your career.
Why Choose Liberty’s Undergraduate Aviation Management Degree Online?
Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Aviation Management was built from the ground up to give you flexibility. An undergraduate degree in aviation management can help you get ahead if you are looking to start or advance your career.
If you don’t want to fly or if you are not able to fly, you still have options. If you are interested in aviation, our program may be right for you. Our 100% online program allows you to pursue a business career that is specifically tailored for aeronautics. If you do happen to have prior flight training, we can help you maximize that experience by evaluation for transfer credit. 
All of our programs and courses are taught from a biblical worldview. A foundational knowledge of biblical principles can equip you to honor the Lord in your future career. Liberty’s faculty have real-world experience in aviation management and operations that allow them to better instruct you. They also have a strong foundation in biblical truth that conveys the biblical worldview that we teach. 
Once you have completed a bachelor of science in aviation business administration, your education does not have to end. If you are interested in continuing further with an aviation management school, Liberty University offers a Master of Science in Aeronautics. An aviation management graduate program can help you take your career to even higher heights. 
Interested in Transferring Flight Training?
If you have prior flight training and want to expand your horizons, an aviation business administration degree can help you grow. Instead of entering an entirely new field, you can stay in aviation while branching out. You can transfer some of your aviation training into Liberty’s specially designed BS in Aviation Management. With your training, experience, and new skills in business management, you can become an ideal candidate for organizations looking for managers.
Brand New to the Field of Aviation?
If you are entering the aviation field, Liberty’s BS in Aviation Management can give you a rewarding career path. This program includes aviation management courses online. In these courses, you can learn the fundamentals of aviation while gaining an in-depth understanding of essential business areas. 
Our School of Aeronautics strives to teach you the tools to build a successful future through our online aviation management courses.
The BS in Aviation Management is built around a capstone project. Future employers can see how you would apply your industry-specific knowledge and skills to solve real-world aviation business problems. The essential skills and practical experience you can earn in an aircraft management program can help you stand out in the marketplace.
What Will You Learn in Our 100% Online Aviation Management Bachelor Degree?
Liberty’s BS in Aviation Management is designed to equip aviation professionals for leadership and management roles without flight credentials. You can gain a foundational knowledge of aviation principles in addition to business and management training. These skills you acquire through this program can be useful for aviation-related careers. 
Our program allows you to choose from a large selection of corporate business, business law, and marketing courses. The goal of these courses is to prepare you for a variety of aviation management roles through our aviation management bachelor degree online. 
If you have earned a pilot’s license or completed related training, you may be able to earn transfer credit. This flexibility allows you to keep more of your training credit while still pursuing a career in the aviation field.
To demonstrate your expertise in the aviation business, you will complete a capstone project. In this project, you will apply your skills and knowledge to real-world problems. This can allow you to demonstrate to employers that you can address practical business challenges.
An aviation operations degree offered through Liberty will include airport operations courses online. Your courses cover aviation leadership, safety, weather, human factors, and history. Other topics will include air carrier management, non-profit aviation management, and principles of aviation administration.
The business courses required for the degree will include topics such as: 
Financial principles
Human resources
Organizational behavior
Principles of marketing and management
The topics in our Bachelor of Science in Aviation Management degree online can help you master topics essential for your career. 
Aviation Management Degree Featured Courses
AVIA 245 – Aviation Leadership
AVIA 314 – Principles of Aviation Administration
AVIA 360 – Corporate and Business Aviation
BUSI 342 – Human Resource Management
Highlights of Our BS in Aviation Management Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online aviation management degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Transfer in previous flight credentials for course credit and complete your degree faster.
Complete an aviation management capstone project to demonstrate how your industry-specific skills can solve real-world problems."
"https://www.liberty.edu/aeronautics/bachelors/aviation-technology-flight-and-maintenance/","Residential Program B.S. in Aviation Technology: Flight and Maintenance
Combine Flight and Aviation Maintenance Training with our Bachelor’s Degree in Aviation Technology: Flight and Maintenance
Prepare for a career as a skilled pilot and mechanic. Through our Bachelor of Science in Aviation Technology: Flight and Maintenance program, you’ll gain the knowledge, skills, professionalism, and strong Christian character you need to succeed. As a student in our School of Aeronautics, you will also have the opportunity to earn an aircraft maintenance certificate to serve as a mechanic and pilot.
There are many cases when just having a pilot certification is not enough. Liberty University offers both the pilot skills and mechanic certification requirements you’ll need for your career. The B.S. in Aviation Technology – Flight and Maintenance degree will give you all the necessary training and certification.
In this degree, you will take courses such as Commercial Flight, Aviation Leadership, and Turbine Engine Technology. Learn from professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and who share your passion for flight training and aviation maintenance. There is a great need for pilots and mechanics with a heart to serve in the mission field and fulfill the Great Commission. Get the skills and credentials you need to join their ranks.
Academic Information – BS in Aviation Technology: Flight and Maintenance
Featured Courses in Flight Training and Aviation Maintenance
Aviation Foundations (AVIA 102)
Aviation Leadership (AVIA 245)
Instrument Flight (AVIA 320)
Commercial Flight I (AVIA 325)
Maintenance Practices I (AVMT 104)
Turbine Engine Technology (AVMT 320)
Start Your Career in Aviation Technology
Benefits of Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Aviation Technology
FAA Part 141 Flight Instruction
Accelerated 12-month FAA Part 147 Maintenance Training
Financial Aid Available
Post-9/11 GI Bill® & Yellow Ribbon Available
Regional Airline Hiring Agreements
Accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges
Important Information
Costs & Financial Aid
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government Web site at https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/bible/","Dive Into God’s Word with Liberty’s 100% Online Bachelor’s Degree in Biblical Studies
Are you interested in earning a bachelor’s degree that can help you gain an advanced understanding of the Bible? Perhaps you’d like to work in youth ministry, become a pastor, or pursue a career in Christian education. If this sounds like you, Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science in Bible is a great option. Our online Bible degree can help prepare you for ministry and equip you with in-depth knowledge of the Bible.
Apply Now Request Info
Our School of Divinity is home to an impressive group of biblical scholars who are dedicated to your success. In our BS in Bible degree, you study under distinguished theologians and experienced pastors who have been studying and teaching God’s Word for years. We know that you expect a high-quality education, and as a pioneer in distance education since 1985, we know what it takes to deliver a respected online degree program that promotes academic, personal, and professional growth.
At Liberty, we don’t just see you as a student. We see you as a child of God, and we believe that you have a unique part to play in the Great Commission. If you’re ready to prepare for your role in spreading the Gospel, partner with us and gain a respected credential that you can use to change lives.
Why Choose Liberty’s BS in Bible Degree?
Liberty is one of the largest Christian universities in the world. Our mission to Train Champions for Christ is at the heart of every degree we offer, including our Bible degree online. Our School of Divinity is home to one of the largest and most impressive groups of theologians in America, and each of your courses will be taught by a Christian professor who is passionate about helping you gain a better understanding of the Bible. Your instructors will pray for you, are available to mentor you, and have a vested interest in your success.
At Liberty, we seek to help men and women develop a robust knowledge of the Bible that can be used to explain and defend the faith. This degree program is offered 100% online in 8-week sections with no required intensives, so you can earn your Bible degree from the comfort of home.
As a student at Liberty, you’ll also have access to our library’s vast collection of scholarly journal articles and publications. In addition, each of your courses includes complimentary electronic textbooks, which can save you an estimated $800-2,000 each year on books!
Liberty is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC), so you can rest assured that your degree has satisfied rigorous accreditation requirements. Whether you hope to plant churches, lead your own congregation, minister internationally, or simply gain a better understanding of the Bible, Liberty’s online bachelor’s degree in Bible can help you accomplish your goals."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/bible/christian-counseling/","Explore Biblical Principles and Learn More About Christian Counseling with Liberty’s Online Bible Degree in Christian Counseling
Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Bible – Christian Counseling is designed to equip you with a foundational knowledge of God’s Word in addition to a working skill set in Christian counseling. This online Christian counseling program consists of 8-week courses with no set login times and no required intensives – which means you’ll have the flexibility to remain committed to your job, family, and community as you pursue your studies.
Today’s world is in desperate need of godly guidance and wisdom. Though these things come directly from the Lord, God uses people to be the hands and feet of Jesus in a broken and fallen world. This degree program can help equip you with the skills needed to serve as a place of respite to the restless, a minister to the lost, and a beacon of light in a world that desperately needs Jesus.
By partnering with us for your BS in Bible online degree, you can derive a lifetime of benefit. Don’t put your career in ministry or Christian counseling on hold any longer – partner with us, gain valuable skills, and use our online Bible degree to spread the Gospel.
Why Choose Liberty’s Christian Counseling Degree Online?
As a pioneer in distance education since 1985, we understand what it takes to develop an online degree program that challenges you academically while respecting your commitments to your job, family, and community. Since our inception in 1971, our mission to Train Champions for Christ has not changed. Developing principled, Christian leaders is what we do. When you choose Liberty, you choose a university backed by a brick-and-mortar campus with years of excellence in education to match.
At Liberty, you won’t just find an online classroom – you’ll find a community of dedicated scholars just as committed to impacting the world for the Kingdom as you are. You’ll also enjoy 24/7 access to our library’s vast collection of online resources, expert professors who are passionate about your success, and a world-class curriculum developed by some of the brightest minds in ministry today.
With competitively priced tuition, a tradition of academic excellence, and a flexible online format, you would be hard pressed to find a university that fits you and your goals better than Liberty. The time has never been better to pursue a BS in Bible degree online – and at Liberty, it has never been easier.
What Will You Learn in Our Bible Degree in Christian Counseling?
In addition to general education courses, this degree program consists of 2 main sections: Bible courses and Christian counseling courses. The unique blend of courses that this program offers can help you develop new skills as you build on skills you already have.
In the Bible section of this degree, you will study the Pentateuch, historical and poetical books of the Old Testament, and the prophets. You will also study the Gospels, Acts, the Pauline epistles, and the general epistles. In addition to a methodical study of Scripture, you will explore Daniel-Revelation, Old and New Testament backgrounds, and research and writing for religious disciplines. To round out the Bible section, you’ll take courses in the practical teaching of Scripture and biblical theology – then take a capstone course that will test your knowledge of the curriculum.
In the Christian counseling courses, you’ll combine your knowledge of the Bible with principles necessary to shepherd others through trying times. Just as it is important to share God’s Word with people, it’s also important to listen. Our Christian counseling courses can teach you various foundational counseling theories, empathetic listening, and how to use Scripture to lead your clients in a direction that is pleasing to the Lord. This section of our online Bible degree in counseling also allows you to choose 3 elective courses – so you can customize your degree to your unique passions.
Featured Courses
CCOU 201 – Introduction to Christian Counseling
CCOU 202 – Issues of Christian Counseling
RLGN 360 – Practical Teaching of Scripture
THEO 360 – Biblical Theology
Highlights of Our Online Bible Degree in Christian Counseling
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can complete our BS in Bible in as little as 3.5 years."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/bible/apologetics/","Defend the Faith and Spread the Truth of the Gospel with Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Bible – Apologetics Online Degree
Christianity and the Bible are under constant attack from all sides. These attacks are nothing new – since the time of Jesus, there have always been those who seek to undermine the Christian faith – but the war against Christianity has taken on new shapes and forms in the 21st century. By learning about the branch of theology called apologetics, you can prepare to take a stand for the faith and provide logical, reasoned arguments in defense of Scripture.
If you want to help those around you grasp the validity of the Bible, it’s important that you dive deep into God’s Word and see firsthand what is written in the biblical texts. That’s why we designed our 100% online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Bible – Apologetics to help you gain an in-depth understanding of Scripture as well as practical methods for defending the Christian faith.
Through this online degree in apologetics, you may come to grow in your own walk with Christ as you learn how to show others the rationality of Christianity. The knowledge you gain in this program can help you come alongside other believers who are struggling with doubt as well as non-believers who need help seeing the truth of the Gospel message. Our BS in Bible – online apologetics degree offers a solid foundation in Scripture and provides ample opportunity for you to study God’s Word directly. That way, you can be sure that your defense of the Christian faith is firmly rooted in biblical truth.
Partner with us and prepare to help those around you grow closer to Christ as you show them the validity of Scripture – all with an attitude of grace, love, and humility.
Why Choose Liberty’s BS in Bible – Online Apologetics Degree?
Liberty has been a pioneer in distance learning since 1985. A lot has changed since then, but our commitment to providing a flexible, affordable, and high-quality education has not. Our BS in Bible – Apologetics degree program is offered 100% online with 8-week courses and no set login times, so you can pursue your degree while remaining invested in your top priorities – like your job, family, and community.
At Liberty, you won’t have to sacrifice quality for flexibility. We are regionally accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). Additionally, our courses are taught by professors with advanced degrees and years of experience in related fields. With their guidance, you can develop practical skills for use in your career while growing in your understanding of Scripture.
Our mission is to Train Champions for Christ – which means we seek to equip passionate, qualified professionals with the knowledge, values, and skills essential for impacting the world. As a student at Liberty, you won’t just get an education – you’ll have the opportunity to become more strongly rooted in a biblical worldview and prepare to help spread the kingdom of God as you serve others through your career.
What Will You Learn in Our BS in Bible – Online Degree in Apologetics?
In this program, you’ll take a wide variety of courses designed to help strengthen your knowledge of Scripture. You will study both the Old and New Testaments with an emphasis on areas such as the Pentateuch, the Major and Minor Prophets, and the Gospels. You’ll also examine the connection between Daniel and Revelation and take courses focusing on Acts, the Pauline epistles, and the general epistles. Other topics of exploration include the methodical study of Scripture, research and writing for religious disciplines, practical teaching of Scripture, and biblical theology.
Our apologetics specialization focuses on helping you develop the critical thinking skills and theological principles needed to respond persuasively to arguments from skeptics and unbelievers. Within this specialization, you’ll explore the major apologetic issues of today and learn how the cultural movements and values of modern society shape people’s approach to the Gospel. You will also examine the historical evidence related to Jesus’ birth, life, ministry, death, deity, and resurrection. Lastly, you’ll study the writings of one of the greatest apologists to ever live – C.S. Lewis – and learn how you can apply his apologetic approach to the current cultural moment.
Featured Courses
APOL 220 – Introduction to Apologetics
APOL 310 – Apologetics in a Secular Age
APOL 320 – Apologetics and the Gospel
APOL 330 – C.S. Lewis and the Apologetic Imagination
Highlights of Our BS in Bible – Apologetics Degree Online
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your Christian apologetics degree online from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
Our 100% online courses are designed to help you earn your degree without putting your life on hold.
You can complete this online bachelor’s degree in apologetics in as little as 3.5 years!
You can potentially transfer in up to 75% of your total credit hours – allowing you to get a head start on your degree and finish your studies even sooner."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/bible/disability-ministry/","Reach Underserved Populations in the Church with a Bachelor of Science in Bible – Disability Ministry
Do you have a passion for caring for those with disabilities? Do you find joy in helping engage different groups of people in a church community? There is a steady demand for professionals in spiritual care ministry. Specifically, there is a need for biblical-theological skills in spiritual care fields like disability ministry.
Our 100% online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Bible – Disability Ministry can equip you with a deep understanding of the theological foundations for this crucial area, the practical implications for ministry contexts, the importance of engaging and connecting with marginalized peoples, and the necessary tools for successful implementation of a disability ministry within the framework of the church.
If you want to foster biblically founded, disability-inclusive ministry environments informed by an understanding of the general impact of disabilities across an individual’s lifespan and increase accessibility, hospitality, and participation within the local church, our program might be right for you.
What Is the Difference Between a Bachelor of Science in Bible and a Bachelor of Science in Religion?
There are many differences between the BS in Bible and the BS in Religion. Regardless of specialization, the BS in Bible has 51 credit hours of core major courses while the BS in Religion degree program has 36.
The 2 programs share many of the same core courses, but there are several key distinctions. The BS in Bible offers a more focused study of Scripture itself. This encompasses background information on both the Old and New Testaments, studies of the epistles and prophets, and analysis of the different types of books in the Bible. The BS in Religion takes a broader approach to studying Christianity and its history. The origins of the church, global studies, and the history of life are all studied in the religion degree program.
Why Choose Liberty’s BS in Bible – Disability Ministry Online Degree?
You see those in your church and community who have increased difficulty due to disabilities and feel compassion. For people with disabilities, it can be challenging to engage in a church community. Skilled professionals who have specific knowledge and training in building effective disability ministries can make a profound difference in the lives of these individuals.
Liberty University is recognized for its academic excellence and commitment to our mission of Training Champions for Christ. To accomplish this mission, we teach all of our courses from a biblical worldview. We recognize the importance of Scripture in building a successful church ministry. Establishing strong, biblical relationships amongst members of a church – particularly those members with disabilities – is part of what helps a church grow, flourish, and nurture the local community.
Our BS in Bible – Disability Ministry program is offered in a 100% online format. This provides you with exceptional flexibility that allows you to further your education while maintaining your personal commitments. You can study core principles of the bible while also specializing in a particular ministry area and have the confidence that our comprehensive curriculum can help you become a well-rounded servant for Christ.
What Will You Learn in Our Disability Ministry Bible Degree?
This program blends academic knowledge of the Bible, practical tools for disability ministry, and knowledge of the Christian worldview to help you provide valuable spiritual guidance that can result in mature, value-driven behavior.
Through the BS in Bible – Disability Ministry, you can gain the knowledge and skills necessary to interpret each major genre of the Old and New Testaments as well as skills needed for teaching in vocational and pastoral ministry. You will take courses in topics such as the Old Testament historical books, major and minor prophets, the Gospels, Acts, Pauline Epistles, and Daniel-Revelation.
The disability ministry specialization is designed to help you serve those who are marginalized by disability. This is accomplished by exploring a theological understanding of disability that forms the foundation for providing disability ministry in the church. Courses cover topics such as accessibility and inclusion in church ministry, congregational care, and theology of disability.
Featured Courses
CHMN 325 – Introduction to Disability Ministry in the Church
CHMN 350 – Accessibility and Inclusion in Church Ministry
CLCM 415 – Congregational Care in Disability Ministry
THEO 305 – Theology of Disability
Course guides coming soon
Highlights of Our BS in Bible – Disability Ministry Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
This Bachelor of Science in Bible – Disability Ministry can be completed in as little as 3.5 years!
You can become specialized in a type of ministry that your church might not yet offer, allowing you to make a significant impact in your congregation and community."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/bible/humanitarian-action-and-human-rights/","Develop a Biblical Foundation for Caring for Those in Need Around the World with a Bachelor’s Degree in Bible – Humanitarian Action and Human Rights
Does advocating for and ministering to those who are oppressed sound like a meaningful way to serve? With Liberty’s Bachelor of Science (BS) in Bible – Humanitarian Action and Human Rights, you can help the suffering through cross-cultural service. We are called to love the Lord and to love our neighbors as ourselves. Liberty’s human rights degree can equip you with a comprehensive understanding of the Bible and how it can be applied when serving the disadvantaged.
Whether you envision serving others in your local community or internationally in the wake of a crisis, Liberty’s bachelor’s degree program in Bible – humanitarian action and human rights may be the program for you. Through this degree, you can prepare to seek positions in various types of nonprofit organizations, governmental aid organizations, and non-governmental humanitarian groups. You can work alongside others seeking to defend human rights and assist those who are suffering. Education is the first step. You can complete our bachelor’s degree to give yourself the skills and knowledge necessary to meet the needs of others.
The Bachelor of Science in Bible is designed to allow you to study the Bible in depth. You can further your understanding of how to study Scripture and relay the information to others through our program. And, by pursuing a specialization in humanitarian action and human rights, you can learn practical skills that you can utilize when serving others.
What Is the Difference Between a Bachelor of Science in Bible and a Bachelor of Science in Religion?
There are many differences between the BS in Bible and the BS in Religion, even when they offer the same specializations. Regardless of specialization, the BS in Bible has 51 credit hours of core major courses while the BS in Religion degree program has 36 credit hours of core major courses.
The 2 programs share many of the same core courses, but there are several key distinctions. The BS in Bible offers a more focused study of the Bible itself. This encompasses background information on both the Old and New Testaments, studies of the epistles and prophets, and analysis of the different types of books in the Bible. The BS in Religion takes a broader approach to studying Christianity and its history. The origins of the church, global studies, and the history of life are also studied in the religion degree program.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Bachelor of Science in Bible – Humanitarian Action and Human Rights Degree?
Liberty University has a mission of Training Champions for Christ. We accomplish this by teaching all our courses, regardless of program, from a biblical worldview. You can learn the skills needed for humanitarian work and the defense of human rights through our Bachelor of Science in Bible. We provide you with the best education possible to help you build a solid foundation of biblical understanding. While many degree programs can help you better understand the Bible and prepare you for a career in outreach, the specialization in humanitarian action and human rights can further hone your skill set to help you serve those in crisis on a global scale.
Our 100% online courses give you the flexibility needed to maintain your commitments. If you are already working or volunteering to serve others, it can be difficult to dedicate the time needed to take courses on a physical campus. By furthering your education online, you can have a better balance of education, work, and life.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Bible – Humanitarian Action and Human Rights Online Degree Program?
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Bible allows you to dive deep into Scripture. The core major courses of the program will incorporate teaching you how to go about studying the Bible effectively. Courses include research and writing for religious disciplines as well as methodical study and practical teaching of Scripture. This program also seeks to establish foundational knowledge of both the Old and New Testaments, major and minor prophets, Pauline and general epistles, Gospels, Daniel-Revelation, Acts, and biblical theology.
The courses required for the specialization in humanitarian action and human rights incorporate practical knowledge about the theological and biblical foundations of caring for others. You can learn to address issues in areas such as:
Disaster relief
Human rights violations
Human trafficking
The sanctity of human life
Trauma healing
You’ll also take 2 courses that discuss the theology of humanitarian response and the theological foundation for human rights. Additionally, your courses can give you a firm grasp of the principles we must uphold and defend for vulnerable populations globally based on the ethic of universal benevolence from the Judeo-Christian faith. Instruction includes how to maintain the dignity of those assisted and provide sustainable relief that does not harm the local economy. You can gain real-world knowledge of how humanitarian actions are carried out by completing a praxis course as part of your specialization.
Featured Courses
CLCM 205 – Introduction to Humanitarian Action
CLCM 475 – Humanitarian Action in Praxis
THEO 320 – A Theology of Humanitarian Response
THEO 325 – Theological Foundations for Human Rights
Highlights of Our BS in Bible – Humanitarian Action and Human Rights Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Prepare to meet the needs of others who are desperate and hurting by serving locally, nationally, or internationally.
Strengthen your biblical and theological foundation so you can better care for others.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/bible/christian-ministries/","Prepare for an Exciting and Engaging Career in Ministry with an Online Christian Ministries Degree
Understanding the Bible and how it relates to our duty in ministry to others is crucial. If you have a desire to help others through Christian ministry and gain a deeper understanding of the Bible, then a Bachelor of Science (BS) in Bible – Christian Ministries degree may be for you.
With an online Bible degree from Liberty, you can prepare to help meet the spiritual needs of others and further the Gospel message. Whether you are new to the ministry field or are a seasoned veteran, gaining a deeper understanding of Scripture and how it relates to ministering to those in need is a great asset to any Christian ministry.
Why Choose Liberty’s Ministry Degree Online?
Since 1971, we’ve been committed to fulfilling our mission of Training Champions for Christ. This goal has helped shape our university, faculty, staff, and students to not only minister to others, but to be agents of change throughout their communities and the world. By joining a student body of people who have their eyes set on Christ, you can train others to do the same.
We know that as you search for biblical studies degrees in ministry, quality is important. Liberty is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC), so you can be confident that you are receiving a world-class education.
In addition, our professors have advanced degrees in Christian studies and related areas. Our faculty also have years of experience in a variety of ministries. They are excited to come alongside you and share their expertise with you so that you can prepare to turn your knowledge into wisdom.
We understand the importance of flexibility while earning your Bible degree online. That’s why our bachelor’s degree in ministry is offered 100% online with no set login times. With flexibility like this, you can remain invested in your family, church, and community while earning your online ministry degree.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Bible Degree?
As you pursue your online Bible degree, you will study the nuances of Scripture. You will dive deep into topics such as the Major and Minor Prophets, Old Testament poetry and historical books, theology, and more. By gaining a thorough understanding of the epistles, New and Old Testament backgrounds, and methods of teaching Scripture, you can prepare for an exciting variety of job opportunities.
Within the Christian ministries specialization, you will have the opportunity to mix and match courses from areas of study like youth ministry, Christian leadership and church ministry, evangelism, and global studies. By having the flexibility to choose courses that fit your career goals, you can better prepare to advance in your career or pursue positions of added responsibility within the field of Christian ministry.
Featured Courses
BIBL 300 – Pentateuch
BIBL 310 – Old Testament Historical Books
BIBL 360 – Methodical Study of Scripture
THEO 360 – Biblical Theology
Highlights of Our Online Bible Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online Bible degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can complete your BS in Bible degree in as little as 3.5 years!
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/chemistry/","Residential Bachelor of Education in Chemistry Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Licensure
Equip yourself to meet the learning needs of your students with a Bachelor of Education in Chemistry Education, Grades 6-12. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses from a science-integrated approach. Our education methods classes are designed to give you the tools to meet the needs of every learner. You’ll learn how to utilize the strengths all students bring to the classroom. In-field classroom experiences throughout the program will allow you to put the theory you learn into practice. And our classes in general chemistry, organic chemistry, and physical chemistry will prepare you to teach these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in Chemistry education. Liberty faculty will show you how to view teaching through a biblical worldview. You’ll be ready to make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Chemistry Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about the elements of God’s creation and want to help learners develop the same zeal. This degree will allow you to begin a career in Chemistry Education. You’ll have the opportunity to gain state licensure and the qualifications needed to teach students at the middle or high school level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Chemistry Education Courses
General Chemistry I (CHEM 121)
Biochemistry I (BCHM 451)
Analytical Chemistry (CHEM 321)
Instrumental Analysis (CHEM 322)
Inorganic Chemistry (CHEM 471)
Career Opportunities in Chemistry Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach Chemistry Education in grades 6-12.
Secondary Chemistry School Teacher
K-12 Education Consultant
K-12 Curriculum Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/christian-leadership-church-ministries/","Residential Christian Leadership & Church Ministries Program
Become a Christian leader and receive the ministry training you need to effectively serve in local church, parachurch, and nonprofit organizations. Your B.S. in Christian Leadership and Church Ministries degree will equip you with professional skills for planning, organizing, and developing Christian ministries. You’ll also gain the ability to evaluate models of leadership, programs, and various philosophies of Christian ministry.
In addition, through Liberty University’s B.S. in Christian Leadership and Church Ministries, you’ll have the opportunity to increase your career marketability by pursuing an area of study within one of Liberty’s other schools.
Gain knowledge, values, and skills so you can effectively fulfill your purpose in church and parachurch ministry.
Explore our Program of Study
Cognates for the B.S. in Christian Leadership & Church Ministries 
See what it takes to complete your degree with its degree completion plan (DCP) below.
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities
Ministry Director
Church Administration
Parachurch Leadership
Ministry Associate
Ministry roles in bivocational settings
Camps Director
Women’s Ministry Director
Christian Education Director
Evangelist
Media Ministry"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/christian-leadership-church-ministries/womens-leadership/","Residential Degree in Christian Leadership & Church Ministries: Women’s Leadership
With the Bachelor of Science in Christian Leadership and Church Ministries: Women’s Leadership degree, you’ll learn how to minister and mentor other women in God’s Word. Gain practical ministry training with an added focus on women’s leadership. 
Serve and minister to women of all ages. Encourage each other in Christ. With the Women’s Leadership cognate, you’ll be able to effectively organize and lead in women’s ministry.
Academics: Women’s Leadership Cognate
Featured Women’s Leadership Courses
Non-Profit Management (BUSI 409)
Discipleship in Church Ministries (CHMN 447)
Survey of Women’s Ministries (WLED 220)
The Role of Christian Women in Ministry (WLED 330)
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities in Women’s Leadership
Ministry Director
Church Administration
Parachurch Leadership
Women’s Ministry Director
Christian Education Director
Ministry Associate
Ministry roles in bivocational settings"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/christian-studies/","B.S. in Christian Studies
Residential Christian Studies Degree
Gain the foundational skills you need to enter into ministry with a Christian Studies (B.S.) degree from Liberty University. Develop your understanding of biblical and theological concepts important to the Christian faith and prepare for future ministry through practical training opportunities. 
Tailor this degree to fit your future vocational goals and use free elective space to pursue two minors of your choice. Study under professors with doctoral level training education, and who are grounded in their Christian worldview as you prepare for success in your future endeavors. 
Academics: B.S. in Christian Studies
Featured Christian Studies Courses
New Testament Theology (BIBL 460)
Old Testament Theology (BIBL 461)
The Church & Its Mission (CHHI 325)
Spiritual Foundation for the Christian Life (CLCM 200)
Get Started with Your Christian Studies Degree
Career Opportunities With This Degree
Church Ministry Staff
Parachurch Ministry Staff
Teacher
Christian Education
Evangelist
Missionary"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/christian-leadership-management/","Earn a Bachelor’s in Christian Leadership and Management – Business Management Degree and Serve with Excellence
Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science (B.S.) in Christian Leadership and Management – Business Management is designed to prepare you with the fundamental principles of leadership. Our program can show you how biblical principles are the backbone of leading with integrity. 
In our online Christian B.S. in leadership and management, you can study areas like human resources, accounting, and business management. You can learn how each of these areas relates to ministry administration and how you can apply them in your life. Our Christian leadership studies degree can help equip you with the skills to faithfully administer and steward a ministry or nonprofit.
What is Christian management?
Managing others requires leadership skills like strategic thinking, active listening, creativity, and more. Christian management helps you take leadership concepts from God’s Word and apply them to your professional life. You will look at great biblical leaders like King Solomon, Paul the Apostle, and even Jesus Himself. Studying the actions and character of biblical leaders can help you understand the type of behavior you want to exemplify.
In addition to biblical study, Christian management also involves an in-depth look into business principles. Our program addresses topics in accounting, business law, marketing, and economics. Each of your business courses are designed to help you learn how to run an effective ministry or nonprofit organization. 
You can learn to be a skilled professional who leads with integrity. The combination of biblical and business principles taught in our program can help.
Why Choose Our Christian Business Management Degree Online?
At Liberty, our mission is Training Champions for Christ who are prepared to lead with excellence and integrity. You can be confident that we are a Christian leadership university offering a program designed with your needs in mind. We offer flexible and affordable online bachelor’s degrees so you can pursue a quality education while maintaining your current responsibilities.
Going back to school can be a challenge, but at Liberty, you’re not alone. Our goal is to support you while you earn your bachelor’s in Christian leadership online. Our program can prepare you with the skills you need to follow God’s calling on your life. 
Benefits of Choosing Liberty’s Christian Business Management Program
Liberty University’s online Christian college graduates are sought after by prestigious companies for their integrity, personal discipline, and versatility.
As a student in our online bachelor’s in church leadership degree program, you can be better equipped with both theoretical and practical knowledge in leadership and management for real-world application.
Our Christian business administration degree may qualify you for increased job opportunities in leadership management.
What Will You Learn in Our Christian Management Courses?
By attending a Christian leaders college like Liberty University, you can learn the academics you need from the biblical perspective you want. Your classes will focus on integrating Christian principles with important business concepts. While pursuing your online degree, you can build a foundational understanding of management that you can apply to a number of fields. 
The professors in our Christian leadership program teach biblical leadership styles by exploring the Old and New Testaments. Our Christian leadership and management program focuses on the personal character development of a leader. You will be introduced to essential marketing principles to properly identify and satisfy the needs and wants of your target audience. By integrating marketing techniques with Scripture, you can gain insight into managerial and behavioral skills to successfully contribute to a business.
Featured Courses
BUSI 240 – Organizational Behavior and Management
BUSI 330 – Principles of Marketing
CLED 300 – Biblical and Theological Foundations of Christian Leadership
CLED 365 – The Personal Development of the Leader
Online Christian B.S. in Christian Leadership Degree Program Highlights
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online Christian business degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting. 
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all online undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You will have access to a wide variety of resources and materials found through our research portal while enrolled in our online Christian business program.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/engineering/bachelors/civil-engineering/","Help Your Community Achieve More with Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering Online Degree
Civil engineers have a hand in helping nearly every part of how modern society functions. Engineers are the creative designers, builders, and maintainers of infrastructure we use every day — from roads, bridges, seaports, and airports to emergency and disaster relief systems used to help keep people safe. If you want to help build and maintain the fabric of modern society, then Liberty’s Bachelor of Science (BS) in Civil Engineering degree online can help you launch a rewarding and fulfilling career.
As the foundation of nearly all branches of modern engineering, civil engineering has a broad scope and is one of the most flexible disciplines. Whether you want to ensure that cities get clean water and energy, or you want to design better, safer roads, an online civil engineering degree can give you the skills you need.
Many industries need civil engineers to help build the backbones of their businesses, which means that a degree in this field can help equip you with in-demand job skills. By pursuing Liberty’s bachelor’s degree in civil engineering, you can seek out lucrative and fulfilling jobs as you provide benefit to society through your work as a civil engineer.
At Liberty, we don’t shortchange you when you pursue an online degree – we empower you. Partner with us and get the training you need to make a lasting impact as a civil engineer.
Is it possible to earn a civil engineering degree online?
Yes! At Liberty University, we offer an online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Civil Engineering. This degree program contains a mix of 8-week and 16-week courses – allowing you to earn a degree on your schedule and pursue most of your education from the comfort of home while enjoying valuable networking opportunities during 2 on-campus intensives. 
The online delivery of this civil engineering degree does not compromise quality or academic rigor. This degree program is designed to help you gain a working knowledge of various engineering topics that can prepare you to pursue a variety of civil engineering careers upon graduation. 
Choose us for your studies and experience firsthand what an online engineering degree from Liberty University can do for you. 
Please note: Senior-level courses for this program will be offered for the first time during the 2023-2024 academic year. 
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Civil Engineering Degree Online?
As a pioneer in distance education since 1985, we understand what it takes to design a respected online degree program that blends convenience, affordability, and academic excellence. This degree program has been carefully designed by industry experts who have a passion for your success 
Liberty’s BS in Civil Engineering is designed to help equip you for engineering roles in the military, private sector, government, and a wide variety of other industries. Our bachelor’s degree in civil engineering – which is offered online with some intensives – focuses on the foundational skills you’ll need for success in your field. 
An intensive will give you the opportunity to visit Liberty University’s beautiful campus in Central Virginia when it fits into your schedule. This provides valuable hands-on training in topics such as material properties, fluid properties, and surveying as well as the chance to meet and collaborate with your peers and professors.
Our engineering students have found roles at companies such as Boeing, Georgia Pacific, NASA, Disney, and the National Ground Intelligence Center for the U.S. Army. The Bureau of Labor Statistics expects that the job market will grow at a rate of 8% between 2020 and 2030.* 
With a median pay of $88,570, you can take advantage of a steady job market with high salary opportunities.* By partnering with us for your civil engineering degree and pursuing a career as a professional engineer, you may see numerous employment opportunities as infrastructure continues to age and market demand requires people to manage future projects. 
With practical skills to help communities build and grow, you can also assist in nonprofit and ministry operations locally, nationally, and abroad. You could also contribute to disaster relief, assist communities in gaining access to water and other essential amenities, and with many other critical needs across the globe. 
A bachelor’s degree in engineering from Liberty University can help you pursue a variety of job opportunities – and it can bolster your résumé by putting your engineering talents to work.
Fundamentals of Engineering Exam
Our civil engineering program provides preparatory coursework designed to equip students to take the Fundamentals of Engineering (FE) exam. This is the first step in the process of becoming a professional, licensed engineer.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Civil Engineers (viewed online Dec. 20, 2021). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Civil Engineering Bachelor Degree?
Our civil engineering degree offers a broad scope of foundational knowledge that can prepare you for a career in the engineering field or for graduate studies. Civil engineers must consider costs, environmental hazards, government regulations, the ability to withstand natural disasters, the durability of the infrastructure, and how engineering technologies can be used to build lasting structures. 
You will take engineering courses covering these and other topics with an emphasis on structural, geotechnical, transportation, and construction engineering to prepare you for a successful career in civil engineering. Other courses cover topics like the protection of water resources and the prevention of erosion due to runoff from storms and flooding.
As a civil engineer, you may also specialize in transportation and planning. Throughout this degree, you will study how to plan, design, build, and maintain facilities that serve millions of people. These might include highways, railroad systems, mass transit, and airports. 
Our bachelor of engineering is also an excellent way for you to pursue a career designing construction projects of varying scopes – from small, local projects to large undertakings for cities. As a civil engineering graduate from Liberty University, you can be assured that you will be prepared for an exciting future in building your community.
Program Educational Objectives
Our goal is that our civil engineering graduates are able to do the following within a few years of graduating:
Integrate creativity, ethics, faith, and profession consistent with Christian principles.
Continually improve and learn in an ever-changing technologically-advancing culture.
Understand and solve problems in an efficient and effective manner based on requirements.
Listen with an open mind and communicate effectively as a team member across various audiences and platforms (e.g., oral, written, visual).
Produce validated, quality work within acceptable tolerances and adhere to appropriate codes and standards.
Attain relevant, specific certifications and licensures.
Featured Courses
ENGV 225 – Surveying 
ENGV 365 – Hydraulic Engineering
ENGV 380 – Project and Construction Management
ENGV 410 – Transportation Engineering*
*Course guides coming soon
Highlights of Our Civil Engineering Bachelor’s Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BS in Civil Engineering degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
Through 2 required on-campus intensive courses, you will meet and collaborate with peers and professors while completing your online degree and gaining valuable hands-on training. These intensives will give you the opportunity to visit Liberty University’s beautiful campus in the Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia when it fits into your schedule.
Our civil engineering bachelor’s degree program will include preparatory coursework that is designed to equip you to take the Fundamentals of Engineering (FE) exam.
You will have access to the latest technology and qualified faculty who seek to know you personally and provide you with opportunities for education, research, and training in a Christ-centered environment.
Liberty University’s Center for Engineering Research and Education (CERE) promotes research and development of all forms of energy generation, storage, and transmission. As an online student, you will benefit from the findings of our brick-and-mortar campus."
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/coaching/","Residential Degree in Coaching
The Bachelor of Science in Coaching will prepare you to work as a coach within the sport industry. You will receive instruction in a variety of different sports and athletic programs.
This degree is offered through the Hospitality & Sport Management Department.
Within the Coaching Program you will develop knowledge and expertise in:
Administration
Logistics
Pedagogy
Regulations and NCAA Compliance
Strength and Conditioning
Leadership
Communication
Motor Movement
Film Editing
Sport Psychology and Motivation
Academics: B.S. in Coaching
Featured Coaching Courses
Introduction to Coaching (SMGT 300)
Coaching Football (SMGT 304)
Coaching Dynamics (SMGT 314)
Sport & Exercise Psychology (SMGT 400)
Career Opportunities in Coaching
Athletic Department Manager
Coach
College Athletic Recruiter
Scout
Sport Marketer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/engineering/bachelors/civil-engineering-bsce/","Residential Civil Engineering Degree
Gain a broad spectrum of civil engineering’s foundational principles with a Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering (BSCE) from Liberty University. Here, you’ll develop practical and technical skills in Civil Engineering through lecture, laboratory, and field experiences. You’ll also participate in a Senior Design Capstone Project that can mirror what you’ll encounter in the workplace.
With this degree, you’ll prepare for a career as a civil engineer for the local, state, or federal government or in the private sector where you could work in construction, industry, design, or more. Civil engineers can work in the office or on the field, nationally or internationally, and can be in the public eye or set apart from it.
As a civil engineer, you could:
Design roads, bridges, dams, etc.
Analyze the strength of soils, concrete, steel, etc.
Provide safe drinking water to the public
Treat wastewater before returning it to the environment
The BSCE focuses on construction, geotechnical, structural, and transportation technical areas.
Civil Engineering Facilities
Through this degree, you’ll also sharpen your decision-making, problem-solving, and leadership skills. Learn from professors who are grounded in their Christian faith while you develop the values, knowledge, and skills essential to positively influence the civil engineering profession.
The Civil Engineering program will be applying for ABET accreditation during the 2023-2024 accreditation cycle.
Academics: B.S. in Civil Engineering
Featured Civil Engineering Courses
Structural Analysis (ENGV 325)
Project & Construction Management (ENGV 380)
Geotechnical Engineering (ENGV 395)
Transportation Engineering (ENGV 410)
Career Outlook*
Median Pay: $88,050/year, $42.33 /hour
Number of Jobs: 318,300
*2021 stats from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
Career Opportunities in Civil Engineering
Civil Engineer specializing in construction, environmental/water resources, geotechnical, structural, or transportation
Project Manager
Design Engineer in a consulting firm or private industry
Local, state, or federal government engineer
Missions work related to civil engineering in developing countries
Be paid to attend graduate school earning an MS and/or Ph.D., then teach and/or do research
Pursue an MBA and become co-owner of a consulting firm
Pursue law school and do case studies on engineering failures"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/commercial-music/","Residential Commercial Music Programs
Gain high-level musical and industry-level skills and become a Champion for Christ in the commercial music field. Prepare for an exciting career with the B.M. in Commercial Music from Liberty University. You’ll grow through core commercial music studies including music theory and musicianship, music technology, and introductory music business and entrepreneurial concepts for the commercial musician.
This degree is taught from a Christian worldview by experienced professors committed to sound evangelical theology. This sets Liberty University’s Commercial Music curriculum apart and brings a significant influence on the commercial music industry as a whole.
Here, you’ll get ensemble experience, applied instruction on primary and secondary instruments, and hands-on training in the music industry under the supervision and mentoring of well-established, professional practitioners. Our multiple Commercial Music concentration options in this degree program will target your interest and calling.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
Learn about the B.S. in Commercial Music degree
Admission Requirements
View Liberty’s undergraduate admissions requirements.
B.M. Commercial Music Concentrations
Credit hours for Commercial Music concentrations range from 126 to 128.
Film Scoring (Film & Media)
Compose music soundtracks with electronic instruments and traditional acoustic instruments. Create commercial music projects that involve syncing music to film.
Jazz Studies
Arrange commercial music in a jazz style. Perform written and improvised commercial music in a jazz style.
Performance
Formulate a strategy for developing a successful career in the music industry. Develop contextually based worship strategies.
Publishing and Producing
The student will be able to create quality commercial music content using best practices in music publishing and audio production for worship.
Recording, Engineering, and Producing
The student will be able to create quality commercial live and recorded music content using best practices in current audio technology and production.
Songwriting
Demonstrate the process of writing, preparing, and presenting a song for professional publication. Develop contextually based worship strategies.
Career Opportunities for B.M. in Commercial Music Graduates
Stage or Studio Musician
Film Composer
Music Producer/Performer
Artist Management
Music Industry Marketing
Front-of-house (FOH) Engineer
Worship Tech Director
Songwriter-Artist"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/commercial-music/film-scoring-film-media/","Residential Commercial Music – Film Scoring (Film & Media) Program
Get ready for a successful career in film scoring with your B.M. in Commercial Music – Film Scoring (Film & Media) from Liberty University. Through individual coaching and group interactions, you’ll learn the technology and preparation skills essential for this unique arena of the music industry.
The film scoring program offers high-level training and musicianship for future film score composers. Classes, private lessons/coaching, and academic-industry hybrid courses highlight this degree program.
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Professors in this degree program hold advanced and terminal degrees in music, as well as decades of real-world experience in the music industry.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600 square foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
The degree requires a local practicum and an extensive internship experience within the music industry.
You will need to pass a special audition in order to be accepted into the program’s upper-level training.
Featured Film Scoring Courses
Advanced Film Score Programming (CMUS 437)
Fundamentals of Music Production and Audio (MUSC 218)
Commercial Improvisation Techniques (MUSC 360)
Entrepreneurship in the Christian Music Industry (MUSC 372)
Career Opportunities: Commercial Music – Film Scoring Graduates
Film Composer
Music Licenser
Sound Designer
Music Director or Supervisor for Films
Game Composer/Orchestrator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/commercial-music/jazz-studies/","Residential Commercial Music – Jazz Studies Program
Prepare for your future in jazz and commercial music with a Commercial Music (B.M.) – Jazz Studies degree from Liberty University. Gain the knowledge and skills you need to excel on stage and in the studio through individual coaching and group interactions. Learn music performance techniques, improvisation approaches, and the entrepreneurial skills necessary for success in the commercial music field.
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Professors in this degree program hold advanced and terminal degrees in music, as well as decades of real-world experience in the music industry.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
This degree requires internship experience within the music industry.
You must pass the Sophomore Review in order to be accepted into this program’s upper-level training.
Featured Jazz Studies Courses
Jazz Improvisation and Lab I (MUSC 143)
Senior Commercial Music Program (MUSC 468)
Jazz Styles and Analysis (MUSC 327)
Jazz Ensemble II (MUSC 483)
Career Opportunities: Commercial Music – Jazz Studies Graduates
Stage Musician
Studio Musician
Session Artist
Music Producer/Performer
Music Industry Collaborative Artist
Entertainment law- and business-oriented careers"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/commercial-music/performance/","Residential Commercial Music – Performance Program
Learn what it takes for high-level stage and studio artistry with your B.M. in Commercial Music: Performance degree from Liberty University. The music industry needs capable stage artists who represent the Lord Jesus Christ in excellence, integrity, character, and example. This program offers the foundation you need to walk this kind of pathway while gaining performance, presentation, and preparation skills. Prepare for success in the music industry and performance marketplace through your studies, individual coaching, and group interactions.
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Professors in this degree program hold advanced and terminal degrees in music, as well as decades of real-world experience in the music industry.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
The degree requires a local practicum and an extensive internship experience within the music industry.
Students interested in this program must pass a special audition in order to be accepted into the program’s upper-level training.
Featured Performance Courses
Concert Promotions and Tour Management (CMUS 261)
Artist Presentation I (MUSC 279)
Artist Spiritual Formation (MUSC 373)
Christian Music Industry Seminar (MUSC 436)
Career Opportunities: Commercial Music – Performance Graduates
Stage Musician
Studio Musician
Session Artist
Music Industry Collaborative Artist
Music Producer/Performer
Worship Leader"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/commercial-music/recording-engineering-producing/","Gain the skills and knowledge you need to excel in high-level music production with a Commercial Music (B.M.) – Recording, Engineering, & Producing degree from Liberty University. Learn how to become a capable music producer through group interactions, and private coaching sessions. Develop a strong foundation in production, technology, and musicianship that will enable you to represent Christ through excellence in the commercial music industry.
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Professors in this degree program hold advanced and terminal degrees in music, as well as decades of real-world experience in the music industry.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
The degree requires considerable study within one or more local practicums and an extensive internship experience within the music industry.
You will need to pass the Sophomore Review in order to be accepted into the program’s upper-level training.
Academics: Commercial Music (B.M.) – Recording, Engineering, & Producing
Featured Recording & Producing Courses
Pro Tools Fundamentals I (CINE 271)
Music Production Capstone (CMUS 424)
Principles of Audio Mixing and Production (MUSC 369)
Sound Reinforcement II (MUSC 429)
Career Opportunities: Commercial Music – Recording, Engineering, & Producing Graduates
Streaming Media/Digital Music Content Creator
Music Industry Collaborative Artist
Entertainment law- and business-oriented careers
Music Producer
Studio Engineer
Front-of-house (FOH) Engineer
Worship Tech Director"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/commercial-music/publishing-producing/","Residential Commercial Music – Publishing & Producing Program
Develop the foundation you need to successfully enter the world of commercial music, publishing, and producing with a Commercial Music (B.M.) – Publishing & Producing degree from Liberty University. Gain skills in project creation, technologies, and strategies for business leadership in music. Learn through individual coaching sessions, and in group settings, as you pursue excellence in the commercial music field.
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Professors in this degree program hold advanced and terminal degrees in music, as well as decades of real-world experience in the music industry.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
This degree requires considerable study within one or more local practicums and an extensive internship experience within the music industry.
You must pass the Sophomore Review in order to be accepted into the program’s upper-level training.
Featured Publishing & Producing Courses
Development of the Artist (CMUS 308)
Commercial Music Portfolio (CMUS 423)
Studio Producing, Mixing, and Audio Engineering (MUSC 362)
Marketing Commercial Music and Record Label Operations (MUSC 461)
Career Opportunities: Commercial Music – Publishing & Producing Graduates
Music Producer
Music Publisher
Music Industry Marketing
Artist Management
Music Industry Collaborative Artist
Entertainment law- and business-oriented careers"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/b-s-in-commercial-music/","Residential Commercial Music Degree (B.S.)
Prepare for success in the music industry with a B.S. in Commercial Music degree from Liberty University. Study popular/commercial music while being equipped to serve the broader music community.
Strategically designed for non-performers, the B.S. in Commercial Music will train you to be versatile within the music industry, adapting to its ever-changing vocational landscape. Gain a Christ-honoring worldview from professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and experts in the field.
While enrolled in this degree, you’ll enjoy access to state-of-the-art facilities in Liberty’s School of Music, including:
1,600 seat Concert Hall
Al Denson Songwriting Lab
Mathena Recording Studio
Mac Lab with Pro-Tools and other recording software
50 Practice Rooms
Learn about the B.M. in Commercial Music degree
View the online program
Academics: Commercial Music (B.S.)
Transfer Credit
See transfer policies
Courses You Could Take
Survey of Commercial Music Literature (CMUS 213)
Commercial Music Production & Audio (CMUS 218 )
Entrepreneurship in Commercial Music Community (CMUS 372)
Christian Music Industry Seminar: Songwriting (CMUS 436 )
Commercial Music Project (CMUS 496) or Commercial Music Apprenticeship (CMUS 499)
Career Opportunities with a BS in Commercial Music
Commercial music teacher
Music arranger
Music editor
Music producer
Music publicist
Social media music specialist
Sound engineer
Studio, film, and game audio production technician"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/commercial-music/songwriting/","Residential Commercial Music – Songwriting Program
Equip yourself for a career in songwriting with a Commercial Music (B.M.) – Songwriting degree from Liberty University. Gain a solid foundation in musicianship and song development through classroom study, private lessons, and collaborative experience with students and faculty members. Develop your skills in song design, lyric crafting, arranging, and preparation skills as you prepare to represent Christ in the music industry.
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Professors in this degree program hold advanced and terminal degrees in music, as well as decades of real-world experience in the music industry.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
The degree requires a local practicum and an extensive internship experience within the music industry.
You will need to pass a special audition in order to be accepted into the program’s upper-level training.
Featured Songwriting Courses
Development of the Song (CMUS 408)
Private Songwriting (MUSC 370)
Principles of Songwriting I (MUSC 376)
Commercial Music Industry Seminar (MUSC 436)
Career Opportunities: Commercial Music – Songwriting Graduates
Songwriter-Artist
Lyricist
Arranger
Music Industry Collaborative Artist
Ministry Songwriter-Arranger
Music Producer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/communication/communication/","B.S. in Communication: Communication
Residential Degree in Communication
Regardless of the field, most jobs today require three skills — critical thinking, writing, and presentation. Refine these essential skills and graduate ready to contribute to today’s job market with a Bachelor of Science in Communication. Communicators are confident and prepared to change culture, organizations, and lives.
In Liberty’s Department of Strategic and Personal Communication, we encourage innovation, resilience, and a commitment to Christian values. Explore topics like narrative storytelling and performance, argumentation, crisis communication, Christian ministry communication, political rhetoric, as well as leadership and organizational communication.
Learn How To:
Develop communication strategies that will inspire and motivate audiences
Connect with audiences of varying sizes and demographics
Logically defend your position in front of an audience
Create successful customer service environments
Problem solve with organizations, leading change and crisis communication initiatives
This degree is offered through the Department of Strategic & Personal Communication.
Academic Information for the Communication Major
Communication Courses You Could Take
Communication & Popular Culture (SCOM 210)
Essentials of Customer Service (SCOM 358)
Human Communication in a Technological Age (SCOM 410)
Event Planning & Comm. Coordination (SCOM 430)
Crisis Communication & Negotiation (SCOM 490)
Argumentation (SCOM 335)
Start Your Career in Communication
Career Opportunities for Communication Majors
Fundraising/Development Coordinator
Community Relations employee
Public Affairs staff
Communications Director
Communication Analyst
Public Relations Associate"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/communication/","B.S. in Communication
Residential B.S. in Communication
Prepare to transform culture, organizations, and lives with a Bachelor of Science in Communication degree from Liberty University’s Department of Strategic and Personal Communication.
Study a variety of topics that will equip you to know yourself and your audiences well. Gain the critical thinking, writing, and presentation skills you need to lead in today’s job market.
Taught in an environment that encourages innovation, resilience, and a commitment to Christian values, you’ll receive a current theoretical and professional education from our communication programs, and learn how to apply that knowledge to real-life scenarios and clients. Graduate ready to bring new solutions into the marketplace as a powerhouse that knows people and how to connect with them.
Experience firsthand the difference that excellent communication makes in all areas of life.
Learn How To:
Know your audience. Gain a thorough understanding of how and why certain messages are communicated through what’s spoken, and observation of non-verbals using communication models that stand the test of time.
Create and deliver effective messages specific to your target audience.
Lead teams through conflict resolution and creative problem-solving with a knowledge of your leadership strengths and how to identify those in others.
This degree is offered through the Department of Strategic & Personal Communication.
Academic Information for the Communication Major
Communication Courses You Could Take
Communication & Popular Culture (SCOM 210)
Essentials of Customer Service (SCOM 358)
Human Communication in a Technological Age (SCOM 410)
Event Planning & Comm. Coordination (SCOM 430)
Crisis Communication & Negotiation (SCOM 490)
Argumentation (SCOM 335)
Start Your Career in Communication
Career Opportunities for Communication Majors
Fundraising/Development Coordinator
Communication Director
Sales Director
Nonprofit Communication
Community Relations Manager
Event Coordinator
Public Affairs Coordinator
Communication Analyst"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/music/bachelors/commercial-music/","Start Preparing for Your Commercial Music Career Today
Are you eager to begin a career in music? Maybe you’re ready to take the next step in your musical career. At Liberty, we have an online degree that can help. Our B.S. in Commercial Music can provide you with the liberal arts training and specialized coursework in recording engineering and music technology that you need to advance in this competitive industry.
Imagine spending your days in a recording studio, performing your own pieces, or directing music in a private school or center for the arts. Our online bachelor’s degree is designed to help you land jobs like these. One of the great things about this degree is that it can be completed 100% online. This means you can stay involved with your family, job, and community while earning your bachelor’s degree. We believe that you should have the ability to pursue a better future without putting your current job and family obligations to the side.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Commercial Music Bachelor’s Degree?
Choosing to earn an online commercial music degree with Liberty can help you develop the marketable skills you need to stand out in your field. Our School of Music faculty know the industry better than anyone. Learn from professors with years of extensive career experience in the commercial music industry. Our music degree provides career-focused courses designed by these industry professionals.
At Liberty, one of our goals is to provide you with a reputable degree in an area you’re passionate about. We do this by training musicians like yourself to engage vocationally in the commercial music world with Christ-honoring values and advanced skill in performance, technology, music production, and musicianship. In fact, Liberty is one of the only Christian schools that offers online, undergraduate commercial music training. And because our School of Music is accredited by NASM, the National Association of Schools of Music, you can be confident that you’re receiving a degree that has met standards for academic excellence.
Partner with us to gain invaluable market and entrepreneurial skills to succeed in a highly competitive field without compromising your faith. Our faculty look forward to coming alongside you and developing your passions so you can advance in your career in commercial music.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Bachelor’s Degree in Commercial Music? 
Throughout our online commercial music bachelor’s degree, you will explore all major areas of music theory, techniques, and technology important for success in today’s music industry. Choosing to study with us also provides you with the opportunity to integrate your Christian faith into all areas of music expression and production.
Throughout this degree, you can learn to apply musical style, literature, and theory research to commercial music. You will have music professionals teaching your courses, and you will experience practical learning opportunities through coaching, ensembles, and internships. Let us help you advance your professional skills and set yourself apart in this competitive industry.
Other major topics you will explore in our B.S. in Commercial Music include:
Conducting
Demonstrating technical fluency, expressiveness, and professionalism in commercial music performance
Entrepreneurship in the commercial music community
Identifying harmonic rhythm across various musical styles
Improvisation techniques
Songwriting, film scoring, recording, and mixing
Survey of popular and jazz music writers, influences, and trends
Tonal center referencing
Featured Courses
Check out our featured courses below to learn more about what you’ll be studying!
CMUS 107 – Commercial Musicianship I
CMUS 193 – Innovative Commercial Music Ensemble I
CMUS 213 – Survey of Commercial Music Literature
CMUS 218 – Commercial Music Production and Audio
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/music/bachelors/commercial-music/music-production/","Take Your Next Step in the Music Industry with Liberty’s Music Production Program
Are you interested in becoming a music producer? Do you want to work for a record label or produce music independently? Perhaps you are already working with artists and want to fine-tune your production skills. With a Bachelor of Science (BS) in Commercial Music – Music Production degree from Liberty, you can prepare to take the next step in your music career – whether you are just getting started or seeking new opportunities and positions of added responsibility.
The music world needs talented producers and industry professionals who are knowledgeable about the processes and techniques that transform simple melodies into sensational records. We want to partner with you as you prepare to engage other people through music. So what are you waiting for? Launch your music career with a commercial music production degree from Liberty.
Why Choose Liberty’s Commercial Music Degree?
We know that flexibility and quality are important to you. That’s why our music production major is offered 100% online with no set login times – so you can earn your degree from the comfort of home. In addition, your courses will be taught by professors who have advanced degrees in music and related areas of study.
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Schools and Colleges Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC), so you can be confident that you are receiving a world-class education. We don’t just offer you institutional accreditation – our School of Music is also accredited by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM). Earning a degree with recognition like this can help set you apart from the competition.
What Will You Learn in Our Music Production Degree?
In the commercial music industry, there are a wide variety of skills that you need to master. At Liberty, you can dive deep into these topics and become a skilled producer. Some topics of study include digital audio workstation skills, studio mixing, sound reinforcement, and audio engineering. In addition to music production courses, you will also take classes in commercial musicianship, conducting, commercial music technology, and much more. 
You will even take an applied audio production course that is tailored to your specific career goals. This course is designed to help you graduate career-ready – and so is the entire degree program! With talented faculty who are passionate about your success and a curriculum that has met rigorous accreditation standards, you can be confident that Liberty offers you an education of the highest quality.
Featured Courses
CMUS 335 – Digital Audio Workstation Skills 
CMUS 362 – Studio Producing, Mixing, and Audio Engineering
CMUS 429 – Sound Reinforcement II 
CMUS 462 – Advanced Audio Mixing Techniques
Highlights of Our Commercial Music Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online bachelor’s in commercial music degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
This program is approved by the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
You will have access to a wide variety of resources and materials found through Liberty University’s research portal while you pursue your BS in Commercial Music degree.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/communication/integrated-communication/","Residential Integrated Communication Program
Gain the critical thinking, writing, and presentation skills needed to create change in the marketplace, as well as in your own ventures. Our communication program gives you hands-on experience while providing current theoretical knowledge applied to real-world projects.
Through our Bachelor of Science in Communication: Integrated Communication concentration, you’ll study in an environment that encourages innovation, diversity, and a commitment to Christian values — making you invaluable to many enterprises. Learn from professors who are skilled in their craft and strong in their faith.
Graduate ready to transform organizations and culture with the skills to craft communication strategies in for-profit and non-profit industries as well as entrepreneurial initiatives.
Learn How To:
Design, develop, and execute targeted communication plans
Develop sound relationships with customers, suppliers, vendors, and other affiliates
Identify and develop strategies to meet customer needs
Implement customer relationship management systems
This degree is offered through the Department of Strategic & Personal Communication.
Academic Information for the Integrated Communication Major
Communication Courses You Could Take
Introduction to Graphic Design (ARTS 222)
Media Design (ARTS 224)
Principles of Marketing (BUSI 310)
Mobile & Interactive Tech. Application (ARTS 319)
Essentials of Customer Service (SCOM 358)
Vendor Communication and Strategic Relations (SCOM 380)
Start Your Career in Communication
Career Opportunities for Communication Majors
Corporate Communication Director
Sales Associate
Branding/Marketing Coordinator
Content Developer
Non-profit Communications
Customer/Vendor Relationship Manager"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/computer-science/cybersecurity/","Residential Cybersecurity Program
Prepare for an exciting career in cybersecurity, a rapidly growing field. As the threat of data theft continues to increase in today’s digital world, so does the need for skilled cybersecurity professionals. With a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science – Cybersecurity cognate, you’ll get the training and education you need to defend against nation-states, criminals, and terrorists conducting cyber warfare. You will learn to prevent system breaches and compromised information at the global, national, and corporate levels.
Academics: Cybersecurity Cognate
Featured Cybersecurity Courses
Information Security Concepts and Principles (CSCN 340)
Linux Operating System (CSCN 345)
Aspects of Computer Security-Defensive (CSCN 461)
Modern Cryptography (CSCN 463)
Career Opportunities in Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity Architect
Applications Software Security Engineers
Secure Systems Software Engineers
Penetration Testers
Cyber Security Compliance Architect
Incidence Response Team Member
Network Security Engineer
Systems Security Engineer
Database Security Architect
Web Security Architect
Data Security Analyst
Security Architect
Network Security Engineer
Security Engineer / Security Software Developer
Security Consultant
Forensic Computer Analyst
Cryptanalyst
Malware Analyst
Incident/Security Responder"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/computer-science/","Computer Science Residential Program
Prepare for success in one of the world’s fastest-growing professions with a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science degree from Liberty University. With our ABET-accredited computer science program, you’ll discover the skills that will prepare you to design and implement software, devise new ways to use computers, and develop more effective solutions to computing challenges.
Here at Liberty University, you can choose from five cognates to focus your studies. With proper planning and dedication, multiple cognates are achievable as well.
Computer Science Cognates
General – Residential
Cybersecurity – Residential
Data Science – Residential
Software Engineering – Residential
Web & Mobile Programming – Residential
With the B.S. in Computer Science, you’ll learn how to:
Analyze, design, verify, validate, implement, and maintain complex software systems
Apply discrete mathematics, probability, and statistics in computer science and supporting disciplines
Work in one or more significant application domains
Describe and apply professional and ethical responsibility
Design and conduct experiments
Analyze and interpret data
Hardware Specifications – Computer Science Programs
Processor: Intel i7-Series or equivalent
Memory: 16 GB – 32 GB RAM
Hard Drive: 500GB or higher, or dual 128GB SSD and 1TB HDD
Video: Integrated or Dedicated graphics card with 6GB of VRAM or higher
Wireless Card: 
IEEE 802.11a/b/g/n/ac WLAN NIC
2.4 GHz/5GHz Dual Band
2×2 300 Mbps. (20/40MHz)
WPA2-PSK/WPA2-Enterprise
ABET Accreditation
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Computer Science degree is accredited by the Computing Accreditation Commission of ABET, https://www.abet.org, under the General Criteria and the Computer Science Program Criteria.
ABET accredits postsecondary degree-granting programs housed within accredited institutions. They accredit programs only, not degrees, departments, colleges, or institutions. Learn about our School of Business ABET-accredited program.
This is in addition to Liberty University’s institutional accreditation.
Academics: B.S. in Computer Science Degrees
Featured Computer Science Courses
Programming in C++ Advanced (CSCN 112)
Data Structures and Algorithms using C++ (CSCN 215)
Database Design and Management (CSCN 326)
Computer Architecture (CSCN 342)
Mobile Programming (CSCN 408)
Aspects of Computer Security-Defensive (CSCN 461)
Modern Cryptography (CSCN 463)
Start Your Career in Computer Science
Career Opportunities in Computer Science
Cryptanalyst
Cybersecurity Architect
Applications software engineer
Data Scientist
Strategic Analytics
Mobile Developer
Programmer
Web Developer
Machine Learning Engineer
Marketing Scientist"
"https://www.liberty.edu/engineering/bachelors/computer-engineering/","Residential Computer Engineering Degree
Prepare for a successful career in the expanding field of Computer Engineering with a B.S. in Computer Engineering degree from Liberty University. Focus on reliable and secure architectures and computing platforms in an environment that integrates computer science and electrical engineering.
Meet the field’s significant demand for computer engineers and related professionals. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS Oct. 2017) reported that openings in computer engineering were expected to swell five percent nationally between 2016 and 2026. The BLS also found that job opportunities for software developers—a position held by some computer engineers—were expected to grow by 24 percent between 2016 and 2026, adding an incredible 299,500 jobs across the country.
Study under experienced professionals in the field. Our faculty incorporate their Christian values throughout the classroom experience. Our primary goal is to develop Christ-centered men and women with the values, knowledge, and skills essential to making a positive impact on computer engineering related industries.
As a computer engineer, you would work with hardware and software to make computing platforms and applications more efficient and effective. Your focus would be on innovation—developing new computer hardware, designing and implementing software applications, and enhancing performance and security of computing systems, networks and communications systems.
Specialized equipment and facilities at Liberty University include:
ARM-based microprocessors
Intel-FPGA SoC boards
Accreditation
The Computer Engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission(s) of ABET, under the General Criteria and the Program Criteria for Computer and Similarly Named Engineering Programs.
Academics: B.S. in Computer Engineering
Featured Computer Engineering Courses
Algorithms & Data Structures (CSIS 215)
Computer Architecture (ENGC 361)
Embedded & Real-Time System Design (ENGC 371)
Advanced Embedded Systems Design (ENGC 401)
Career Outlook*
Median Pay: $128,170/year, $61.62/hour
Number of Jobs: 76,900
*2021 stats from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
Career Opportunities in Computer Engineering
Software Application Developer
Software Systems Developer
Computer Hardware Engineer
Computer Software Engineer
Computer and Information Systems Manager
Network & Computer System Administrator
Computer Programmer
Information Security Analyst"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/computer-science/data-science/","Residential Data Science Program
Prepare for your future career in data science with a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science – Data Science from Liberty University. The profession of data science can lead to a multi-discipline career that incorporates the following:
Data and information
Statistics and mathematics
Modeling and analytics for forecasting and inference
Computer science for data access, protection, and management
Our B.S. in Computer Science: Data Science cognate approaches this field of study from a computing technologies perspective. You will find this an ideal program of study if you enjoy discovering hidden information, knowledge, and wisdom in an expanding collection of information commonly called “big data.”
Study in classrooms led by professors who are experienced in their field and dedicated to their Christian faith. Develop your understanding of the professional, ethical, legal, security and social responsibilities of the computer science field as you get ready to enter the workforce or pursue a graduate degree.
Academics: Data Science Cognate
Featured Data Science Courses
Python and R for Data Science (CSCN 321)
Data Engineering (CSCN 322)
Data Visualization (CSCN 323)
Applied Machine Learning (CSCN 421)
Artificial Intelligence (CSCN 422)
Career Opportunities in Data Science
Data Scientist
Machine Learning Engineer
Data Analyst
Computer and Information Research Scientist
Strategic Analytics
Data Architect
Business Analyst
Business Forecaster
Data Engineer
Statistical Analyst
Marketing Scientist
Data Modeler"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/green-and-sustainable-management/","Protect the Environment with Liberty’s Online BS in Business Administration – Green and Sustainable Management 
We know you have a passion for protecting the environment, and our Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Green and Sustainable Management degree is designed to help you understand critical environmental factors so you can become a better steward of the environment. At Liberty University, we believe in Training Champions for Christ who are prepared to lead with integrity, and we are dedicated to providing you with the skills you need to follow your calling. With our BS in Business Administration – Green and Sustainable Management degree, you can become the change the world needs.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Green and Sustainable Management?
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC), so you can be confident in the academic quality of your online sustainable management degree. Throughout your online degree program, you will be taught by professors who strive to give you a better understanding of environmental sustainability from a biblical worldview.
With your passion and a bachelor’s degree from a world-class university, you can stand out from others in your field. Our BS in Business Administration – Green and Sustainable Management degree is offered completely online, allowing you to remain active in your job, with your family, and in your community without the worry of having to take courses on campus.
What Will You Learn about Environmental Sustainability? 
Liberty’s BSBA in Green and Sustainable Management provides classes that will help you understand sustainable ecosystems and explore models for restoring sustainability. Our environmental management classes will present multiple perspectives for each issue and will take a debate-style format that will help you develop critical thinking skills.
With a BSBA in Green and Sustainable Management from Liberty, you can learn how to address environmental issues with creative solutions — giving you experience and confidence you can take with you into your career.
Featured Courses
ENVR 320 – Environment and Sustainability
ENVR 330 – Energy Resources and Efficiencies
ENVR 350 – Environmental Science and Policy
GEOG 370 – Geographic Information Systems I
This online bachelor’s in business administration degree is an excellent stepping-stone towards a Master of Business Administration, which is also offered 100% online at Liberty University.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/financial-planning/","Help Others Achieve Financial Freedom with a Bachelor’s Degree in Financial Planning
Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Financial Planning can equip you to help meet the need for professionals who know how to set and achieve financial goals. With the knowledge you will gain in this program, you could go on to help companies, nonprofits, and individuals make wise financial decisions and become good stewards of their resources.
In today’s society, finances are a common source of stress among people, businesses, and organizations. You can help reduce this anxiety by becoming a financial planner. Whether you want to work as a corporate finance manager or help individuals with their personal financial planning, Liberty can help provide the tools you need to accomplish your goals.
What degree do you need for financial planner jobs?
What is financial planning in a business setting?
What is the difference between a financial planner and a financial advisor?
Why Choose Liberty’s BSBA in Financial Planning Degree Online?
Liberty’s BSBA in Financial Planning is designed to help you stand out in the competitive business industry. Our business degrees are accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP), and our courses are taught by professors who have years of experience in the world of finance. You can be confident that our BSBA program provides quality training from industry experts.
To fulfill our mission of Training Champions for Christ, we have designed our online financial planning degree to help you lead in your field with integrity. Throughout this program, you’ll explore business and finance concepts through the lens of a biblical worldview so you can be prepared to integrate ethical standards with industry best practices.
Our financial planning bachelor’s degree in business administration is offered 100% online, and our classes have no set login times. That means you can complete your coursework wherever and whenever it’s most convenient for you! Most importantly, you can stay invested in the things that really matter — like your family, job, church, and community — while still earning a degree that can help jumpstart your career.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Become Qualified to Pursue Financial Planning Certifications
This program will help you meet the educational requirements needed to sit for the Certified Financial Planner (CFP) certification exam. Take a look below to see what this certification can do for you.
Certified Financial Planner (CFP)
Earning the highly-respected CFP certification can help set you apart from other financial professionals and give your clients confidence in your skills. You can only take the CFP exam after completing certain academic prerequisites, which can be met through our online bachelor’s in financial planning. With Liberty’s competitive tuition rates, our program can help keep your CFP certification costs down.
What Will You Learn in Our BS in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Financial Planning Program?
Prepare to help others discover financial freedom and security.
In this program, you can gain the skills you need to pursue a career as a financial analyst or Christian financial advisor. You will take foundational courses that explore a variety of business topics, including financial accounting, business law, marketing, management, international business, organizational ethics, and strategic planning.
Our financial planning concentration can help you gain specialized skills and equip you to work toward your unique career goals. You will receive targeted training in taxation, retirement planning, investments, risk management, and estate planning. You’ll also learn how to provide valuable financial advice to businesses and individuals as you prepare for a career in business administration and finance.
Learn how to offer financial services to a variety of clients. Our financial planning capstone course can help you synthesize what you’ve learned and apply it to the real world. In this final class, you’ll create a financial plan for a case study client and thus gain practical training that can help you graduate career-ready.
Featured Courses
ACCT 401 – Taxation I
BUSI 352 – Financial and Retirement Planning
BUSI 354 – Estate Planning
BUSI 420 – Investments
Highlights of Our Online BSBA in Financial Planning Degree Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BSBA in Financial Planning degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University’s financial planning college program is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
You could earn additional academic credit for relevant life experience.
Our financial planning courses online are only 8 weeks long, with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times!
Our B.S. in Business Administration serves as an excellent stepping stone toward earning either a Master of Business Administration (MBA) or a Master of Arts in Executive Leadership, both of which are offered online through Liberty.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/healthcare-management/","Residential Healthcare Management Program
Prepare for success in the field of healthcare through Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – Healthcare Management program. As you enrich your understanding of business, you’ll gain insight into ethical, professional, and financial principles that can later be applied to healthcare-specific coursework.
Gain the knowledge and experience as well as the skills in grantsmanship and informatics that you’ll need to serve effectively as a manager in the healthcare field. Also, find out how to integrate faith with learning in a professional atmosphere.
The B.S. in Business Administration & Data Analysis serves as an excellent stepping stone toward earning either a Master of Business Administration, Master of Business Administration in Healthcare Management, or Master of Science, Healthcare Administration offered online through Liberty.
The Business Administration – Healthcare Management (B.S.) degree is also offered online
Academics: Healthcare Management Cognate
Featured Healthcare Management Courses
Legal and Ethical Issues in Healthcare (BUSI 302)
Intro. to Healthcare Administration (BUSI 311)
Human Resource Management in Healthcare Administration (BUSI 344)
Research and Evidence Based Practice in Healthcare (BUSI 418)
Strategic Mgmt. & Marketing in Healthcare (BUSI 428)
Grantsmanship (HLTH 491)
Healthcare Informatics (INFO 320)
Career Opportunities in Healthcare Management
Healthcare Administrator
Patient care services
HR Manager
Hospital and physicians office"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/healthcare-management/","Prepare to Lead Your Health Organization with a Degree in Healthcare Business Administration
Do you want to enter an exciting, rewarding career that lets you apply business management practices to the healthcare system? If so, Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Healthcare Management is a great next step to take in your academic and professional journey. Unlike a general business degree, this program is specifically designed to prepare you for work in the rapidly growing healthcare industry.
For health organizations to be successful, they need individuals who are skilled at handling the administrative aspects of healthcare, such as marketing, financial operations, and human resources. Professionals in healthcare management are the backbone of companies and facilities in health services, and this program will help you gain the necessary skills to work in the business side of healthcare.
The specialized training you gain from this degree can help you break into the competitive healthcare field with confidence in your knowledge and skills.
Why Choose Liberty’s Business Administration and Data Analysis – Healthcare Management Bachelor’s Degree?
Our online BS in Business Administration program is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Earning a bachelor’s degree with this kind of accreditation will provide a reliable credential for your career and make your academic background stand out to employers.
If you want to work in management for a healthcare organization, this program can help provide the competency-based learning you need to launch your career. You won’t just gain textbook knowledge — your courses can also help you develop concrete, on-the-job skills that can boost your résumé and impress employers.
Additionally, you’ll learn from professors who have years of experience in the fields of business and healthcare. Drawing on what they have learned in their own day-to-day work, they can equip you with the tools necessary to succeed.
As pioneers in distance learning, we have designed our BSBA in Healthcare Management to be completely online. This can allow you to earn your degree in a way that best fits your lifestyle. You can devote yourself to what really matters, such as your family, job, and community, while pursuing an education that will help take your career to the next level.
As a Liberty student, you will be able to take advantage of our vast educational resources, including a cutting-edge online learning environment, full-time research assistants, and a brick-and-mortar campus you can visit for campus events and graduation. With our healthcare management program, you can gain the skills you need to be a leader in the healthcare field.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
What Will You Learn in Our Online BSBA – Healthcare Management Degree?
This online degree provides training that blends knowledge and practical skills through classes in accounting, business, economics, and health services. Your courses will explore a variety of legal and ethical issues that arise in health systems, such as lawsuits, data breaches, labor and employment problems, medical malpractice, HIPAA compliance, and patient confidentiality.
You will be introduced to the concepts of medical ethics, contracts, medical records, informed consent, and privacy healthcare laws. In addition, this program covers how to make management decisions based on empirical research and data analysis. You’ll study how to carry out organizational communication, budget development, fiscal management, and grant writing for healthcare facilities. After completing your degree, you’ll know how to lead your organization with authority and integrity.
The courses in our BSBA in Healthcare Management are designed to help you increase productivity and efficiency in healthcare environments. As you learn about the concepts of price, promotion, place, and product as they relate to healthcare, you will be prepared to lead your company toward business practices that help the healthcare industry run more effectively for everyone involved.
Featured Courses in the BSBA – Healthcare Management Degree
BUSI 302 – Legal and Ethical Issues in Healthcare
BUSI 311 – Introduction to Healthcare Administration
BUSI 344 – Human Resource Management in Healthcare Administration
INFO 320 – Healthcare Informatics
Highlights of Our Online BSBA – Healthcare Management Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BSBA in Healthcare Management degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
You can complete our online business and healthcare management degree in just 3.5 years.
You may be able to earn additional college credit for relevant life experience.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/human-resource-management/","Residential Human Resource Management Program
The Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – Human Resource Management will allow you to master organizational behavior, compensation management, workforce planning, and employee and labor relations. You will also study issues within the human resource field and consistently work within teams, equipping you for the future.
Courses will prepare you to serve effectively as an expert in the modern business world, emphasizing the importance of applying ethics to management practices and integrating faith with learning in a professional atmosphere.
Academics: HR Management Cognate
Featured HR Management Courses
Employee and Labor Relations (BUSI 343)
Compensation Management (BUSI 440)
Workforce Planning and Employment (BUSI 443)
Human Resource Development (BUSI 444)
Human Resource Management (BUSI 342)
Career Opportunities in HR Management
Human Resources Assistant
HR Generalist
HR Manager
Human Resources Director"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/international-business/","Residential International Business Program
The Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – International Business specialization will help you develop the business skills necessary to work in the global marketplace. Through your studies, you will be introduced to cultural protocols of the international marketplace, international trade, international law, and business negotiation across borders. 
You will develop skills pertinent to the fields of general business, accounting, finance, and marketing in both the domestic and international marketplace. Courses will prepare you to serve effectively as a business expert in the modern business world, integrating faith with learning in a professional atmosphere.
Academics: International Business Cognate
Featured International Business Courses
Contemporary Issues in International Business (BUSI 360)
Global Industries and Operations (BUSI 365)
International Market Integration and Trade Agreements (BUSI 464)
Export Management Strategy (BUSI 465)
Legal & Ethical Concepts for Decision Makers (BUSI 301)
Career Opportunities in International Business
Foreign Exchange Manager
International Controller
International Human Resource Manager
International Marketing Manager"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/humanitarian-aid/","Residential Humanitarian Aid Program
Make an impact with a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – Humanitarian Aid cognate from Liberty University. This degree with prepare you to serve in times of disaster while giving business oversight and leadership in a disaster relief organization.
With this degree, you’ll dive deeply into the causes of disasters and what individuals and organizations can do to help alleviate the suffering of those affected by a disaster. Learn how nonprofits work, train in the art of conflict resolution and negotiation, and understand the significance of supply chains in providing humanitarian aid.
Here, you’ll study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and who share your passion for helping others. You’ll also get real-world work experience from a semester-long internship.
Academics: Humanitarian Aid Cognate
Featured Humanitarian Aid Courses
Supply Chain Management (BUSI 371)
Non-Profit Management (BUSI 409)
Conflict Resolution and Negotiation (BUSI 455)
Humanitarian Affairs (BUSI 477)
Career Opportunities in Humanitarian Aid
Advisor, International Disaster Response Unit
Campus Relations Training Specialist
International Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) Member
Logistics Associate
Procurement Manager
Program Development Officer
Resettlement Specialist"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/human-resource-management/","Become a Valuable Resource in Any Business with Our BSBA in Human Resource Management Degree
Any good manager knows that a business’s most valuable asset is its people. Making sure that employees’ benefits are managed effectively helps make the day-to-day operation move forward without a hitch. With Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Human Resource Management, you can develop the tools to manage business needs while keeping your employees happy and effective.
At Liberty, we are committed to helping you meet this task head-on with confidence and excellence. With our online human resources degree, you will have the balance of leadership expertise and best practices in human resources in business. Our 100% online HR management degree is designed to help you build up an organization from the foundation of ethical business practice and effective human resource management.
Why Choose Liberty’s BS in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Human Resource Management Degree Online?
A bachelor’s in business administration – human resource management degree can prepare you for many unique challenges that businesses and organizations face. While every professional learns some skills and techniques in business management, human resources skills are a critical missing piece in most professionals’ toolsets. Without having an HR and business management background, organizations in every industry may struggle with employee benefits, government compliance, and many legal requirements. By developing business resource management skills for HR, you can be an asset for almost any business, government agency, or nonprofit.
If you have a business management major in human resources, you can take advantage of new opportunities opening up in the field. Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) estimates that the job market for human resource managers will increase by 9% between 2020 and 2030, which is faster than the average across all occupations. With an average salary of $121,220 in 2020, a career in human resources can be well-paying and rewarding.*
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). Having a bachelor’s degree that has met rigorous accreditation requirements may give you an advantage as you seek career opportunities in the human resources field. As a pioneer in distance education since 1985, we understand what it takes to develop an online degree program that blends flexibility and affordability with academic excellence. When you choose Liberty for your online human resources degree, you choose a university with a tradition of excellence in online education.
If you are looking for a human resources distance learning program, you need options that will give you the credentials you need while not disrupting your life. Liberty’s 100% online format is designed to let you work on your coursework at any time of day and wherever you need.
You want more than a career — you want to make an impact. With our degree in business administration and human resource management, you can gain the knowledge and training you need to lead and influence employees in your organization.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Human Resources Managers: Occupational Outlook Handbook (viewed online Mar. 4, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
Common Questions
Below are common questions you may have about Liberty University’s human resources degree.
What’s the difference between business management and human resource management?
Do I need human resources or business administration for my career?
What do you do with a human resources degree?
Why choose human resource management?
How much does an HR degree cost?
Is a human resource degree worth it?
Can you get a human resources degree online?
What Will You Learn in Our BSBA – Human Resource Management Degree?
Today’s global economy presents many challenges and opportunities for both employers and employees. Our online business classes can help equip you with the training you need to meet the changing demands of the workforce. As an HR manager, you will need to understand wages and salaries and incorporate human resources knowledge with sound judgment. In this role, you will offer both you and your organization the most effective and efficient compensation and benefits system.
With a core of business management online courses and specialized HR courses, you will be prepared to enter the market as a qualified HR professional.
You can develop skills in other important areas of business as well, such as:
Managing other business resources
Professional development
Project management
Training and development
As a BSBA – human resources student, you will study intermediate business computer applications, statistics, and organizational behavior. You will also study accounting, analyze financial statements, explore business law, and dive into a study of international business. From there, this online business degree in human resource management covers corporate finance, business management, marketing, the fundamentals of HR, strategic planning, and operations management. In addition, the core section of this degree teaches organizational ethics, microeconomics, and macroeconomics.
In addition to core business courses, this degree program offers you the opportunity to learn more about human resources management. In the human resource section of this degree, you will study employee and labor relations, compensation management, and workforce planning. The HR specialization is rounded out by studies in human resource development. 
This online business degree is also an excellent stepping stone towards earning a Master of Business Administration, which is also offered online at Liberty University.
Highlights of Our Online Bachelor’s in Business Administration – Human Resource Management (HR Degree)
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online human resource management degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our online undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Students enrolled in our online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration – Human Resource Management program can access a wide variety of resources through Liberty’s research portal.
You can potentially earn additional college credit through relevant life experience.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/marketing-analytics/","Residential Marketing Analytics Program
With a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – Marketing Analytics, you will master skills in consumer behavior, market research, survey design, and marketing analysis. You will develop skills critical to understanding the needs and preferences of consumers, how to conduct meaningful research to identify unmet needs and product/service improvements in the marketplace and measure marketing effort effectiveness.
You will learn business skills pertinent to the fields of general business, accounting, finance, and marketing in both the domestic and international marketplace. Courses will prepare you to serve effectively as a business expert in the modern business world, integrating faith with learning in a professional atmosphere.
Academics: Marketing Analytics Cognate
Featured Marketing Analytics Courses
Marketing Research (BUSI 331)
Consumer Behavior (BUSI 332)
Digital and Web Analytics (BUSI 447)
Applied Marketing Analytics (BUSI 453)
Legal & Ethical Concepts for Decision Makers (BUSI 301)
Career Opportunities in Marketing Analytics
Marketing Research Analyst
Product/Brand Manager
Digital Marketer
Marketing Executive
Content Manager"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/international-business/","Expand Your Career Potential with an Online BSBA Degree in International Business
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – International Business degree can give you the skills and knowledge necessary to conduct business overseas. In this program, you will dive into the political, economic, and legal issues that are associated with carrying out business on the international stage. If you want to pursue a degree that prepares you for exciting career opportunities on a global scale, our BSBA in International Business is a great option!
This program will introduce you to the fundamentals of business administration as well as to specialized topics related specifically to global business. As companies continue to expand overseas, employers need qualified professionals who can implement effective business practices internationally. Partner with us and earn a degree that can equip you to lead in the global market.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Become Qualified to Pursue Your CGBP Certification 
Liberty’s BSBA in International Business will help you prepare to sit for the Certified Global Business Professional (CGBP) examination. Our program provides you with courses that cover the basic skills included in the exam so you can pursue this certification. 
The CGBP is a valuable certification that can do the following: 
Help you advance in your current career
Prepare you for new job opportunities within the business industry
Demonstrate your ability to professionally navigate a variety of business-related challenges
Give employers confidence in your business acumen
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Business Administration and Data Analysis – International Business Program?
Our international business specialization is designed to help you stand out in the competitive business industry. You’ll study under professors who have years of experience in the business world. Drawing on what they have learned in their own careers, they can help you develop real-world skills that will help you stand out to employers.
Our faculty teach concepts that are grounded in biblical principles, and they can equip you to become a Champion for Christ — someone who seeks to fulfill the Great Commission in every area of life. That’s why your international business classes won’t just teach you on-the-job skills — they’ll also help you integrate biblical principles into your career.
The best part? You can pursue your degree while still focusing on what really matters, like your family, job, and community. In our BSBA program, you can complete all of your classes online and access your study materials from the comfort of your own home. We’ll help you meet your professional and academic goals in a way that fits your schedule and lifestyle.
What Will You Learn in Our Online BSBA – International Business Degree?
Your courses will cover many practical topics related to global business administration. For instance, you will explore how international business is shaped by the ever-changing dynamics of multinational economics, politics, and law. You’ll also study how to forge trade agreements, how to conduct business negotiations across borders, and how to manage imports and exports.
This BSBA program can enhance your understanding of international trade law and of emerging market economies. In addition, you can learn about the many different levels of trade that occur between nations, including between governments, large corporations, small businesses, and even individuals.
Our professors will help you develop strong leadership, critical thinking, and communication skills that will serve you well in the fast-paced business world. By earning your bachelor’s in international business from Liberty, you can be introduced to a wide variety of business topics, such as marketing, financial accounting, operations management, microeconomics, macroeconomics, and organizational ethics. Additionally, your cognate courses will dive into international business laws, the global economy, and international finance and marketing.
Join us and prepare to launch a rewarding career in the ever-growing global business industry.
Featured Courses
BUSI 360 – Contemporary Issues in International Business
BUSI 365 – Global Industries and Operations
BUSI 464 – International Market Integration and Trade Agreements
BUSI 465 – Export Management Strategy
Highlights of Our International Business Administration Bachelor’s – International Business Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BSBA in International Business degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
When you study international business online at Liberty, you can access a wide variety of resources through our research portal.
Our BSBA is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
You may be eligible to earn additional college credit through relevant life experience."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/leadership/","Become a Leader in Your Company with a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration – Leadership
Are you seeking an exciting, fast-paced career in the world of business? Do you love bringing people together in pursuit of a common goal? Do you want to strengthen your leadership skills and gain a solid understanding of business practices?
If you answered “yes” to any of these questions, then Liberty University’s online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Leadership may be right for you! Our program is designed to help you develop core business skills so that you can lead with confidence in the competitive business industry.
Whether you want to work for a business, nonprofit, or government agency, our bachelor’s in leadership can help you explore job opportunities in many different fields. Partner with us and gain the skills you need to pursue a career in business.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Why pursue a degree in leadership?
A BSBA in Leadership is a great option if you want to develop foundational business knowledge and essential leadership skills. Whether you’re looking to launch your career or prepare for graduate school, our leadership program can help you pursue your goals.
Good leaders are vital to the success of all companies, regardless of industry — so a leadership degree can help you work in a variety of fields. If you’re seeking a program that helps pave the way to job security and a wide range of career options, our BSBA is for you.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Leadership?
At Liberty, we’re committed to offering an education that fits your schedule. Our BSBA in leadership degree is 100% online, allowing you to stay invested in your family, job, and community while earning your degree. No need to attend any classes on campus — you can complete your courses from the comfort of your home and easily access all of your materials online! With our cutting-edge curriculum, you can develop an in-depth understanding of current business trends and prepare to enter the workforce with confidence.
To fulfill our mission of Training Champions for Christ, we seek to equip qualified candidates to become leaders in the business industry. In this program, you won’t just gain textbook knowledge — you can develop practical, real-world skills that can help boost your résumé. Our faculty are dedicated to helping you grow and succeed in your personal, professional, and academic life.
All of our courses are taught from a biblical worldview, with the goal of helping you integrate ethical standards with industry best practices. You’ll also receive top-notch instruction from professors who have years of real-world business experience. Drawing on what they have learned in their own careers, they are eager and ready to share their expertise with you.
Whether you’re looking to switch career paths or enter the workforce for the first time, Liberty University’s online business degree can help you pursue your goals while keeping your total cost of tuition down. Since this is an ACBSP-accredited program, you can be confident that your degree from Liberty University has met rigorous academic standards and accreditation requirements.
What Will You Learn in Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Business Administration – Leadership Program?
Gain the business administration, leadership, and management skills needed to succeed in the rapidly changing business industry.
In this program, you’ll take a combination of core business courses and specialized leadership courses. That way, you can prepare not just to work in business, but to become a leader in your organization. You’ll explore essential business topics, including financial accounting, business law, corporate finance, international business, marketing, and organizational ethics.
You’ll also take several classes that can help equip you for leadership positions. In our strategic planning and business policy course, you can learn how to analyze and evaluate complex business problems and recommend courses of action that can bolster your company’s growth. Additionally, you can learn how to oversee all aspects of business operations and optimize your organization’s performance.
Understanding how to communicate with teams is an important aspect of business management. Our bachelor’s in business administration – leadership examines the opportunities and challenges faced by those in leadership. You can learn how to develop business plans that are both ethically and financially sound. By exploring team dynamics, conflict management, and negotiation, you can become a leader who inspires creativity and productivity.
Explore the theoretical roots of leadership, then apply your knowledge to real-world scenarios. Throughout this program, you will explore the characteristics of an effective leader, including how to be a model of servant leadership. Our seasoned faculty can help equip you to oversee projects and implement effective changes so that you can streamline business processes to increase efficiency. Partner with us and learn how to build an effective team that can accomplish business goals.
Featured Courses
BUSI 313 – Project Management
BUSI 345 – Leadership Theory and Practice
BUSI 427 – Team Dynamics
BUSI 455 – Conflict Resolution
Highlights of Our BSBA – Leadership Degree Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BSBA in Leadership degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, we provide electronic textbooks for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University’s business administration program is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
Liberty is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
You could earn additional academic credit for relevant life experience.
The courses in our business administration leadership program online are only 8 weeks long with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
Our BSBA serves as an excellent stepping stone toward earning an online Master of Business Administration.
You’ll have the opportunity to network with business students and professionals from across the country while completing our online leadership degree."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/marketing-analytics/","Launch Your Career with a Bachelor’s in Business Administration – Marketing Analytics Degree
Companies of all sizes use marketing campaigns to reach clients and consumers. But how can they be sure their marketing strategies are effective? The answer: market research analysts.
Market analysts evaluate the success of marketing initiatives. They look at data from many different platforms — including websites, social media, mobile apps, and emails — to determine whether a company is meeting its advertising goals.
If you want to help businesses improve their marketing tactics, Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Marketing Analytics degree can help! Our program can equip you to analyze and assess your company’s marketing performance. You’ll also gain core business skills that will be useful in a wide variety of careers.
Partner with us and prepare to lead as a Champion for Christ in the world of business.
What is marketing analytics?
At its core, analytics is the technical side of marketing. Market research analysts use statistics, data analysis, and predictive modeling to examine consumer behavior and evaluate marketing effectiveness.
As a marketing analyst, you can help businesses assess their current marketing tactics and find ways to branch out or improve. In other words, you can help them figure out what is and isn’t working in their advertising campaigns. That way, your company can stay up-to-date with industry trends and create marketing strategies that drive measurable growth. 
If you love conducting research and handling data and numbers, a career in marketing analytics may be right for you!
Why Choose Liberty’s BS in Business Administration – Marketing Analytics Program?
Earn your degree from the comfort of your home. Our Bachelor of Science in Business Administration – Marketing Analytics is available 100% online, and the courses have no set login times. We offer a fast, flexible path to graduation that lets you complete your degree without putting your life on hold.
Liberty’s bachelor’s in business administration – marketing analytics is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). You can be confident that this degree will be a valuable, industry-recognized credential. And by studying under professors with years of real-world business experience, you can develop practical skills that will help boost your marketability.
Learn how to integrate ethical principles with best practices in marketing management. We won’t just help you get a degree — we’ll equip you to use your knowledge, skills, and passion in service to God and others.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor of Science in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Marketing Analytics Online Courses?
In this program, you’ll take a mix of core business, accounting, and economics courses. Some of the topics you’ll study include financial accounting, business law, international business, corporate finance, organizational ethics, and operations management. With this knowledge, you can pursue many job opportunities in the domestic and global marketplace.
Learn how to carry out effective consumer research. Our concentration in marketing analytics provides an overview of various research methods, both quantitative and qualitative. You’ll be equipped to evaluate the effectiveness of marketing tactics, as well as measure consumer preferences and behavior. That way, you can help your company achieve its sales goals, make wise marketing decisions, and develop goods and services that meet the needs of consumers.
Market research impacts every aspect of advertising — from social media campaigns to internet marketing. By earning our BS in Business Administration – Marketing Analytics degree, you can become a valuable business asset and help your company thrive.
Earn your bachelor’s in business administration – marketing analytics today — and prepare to help your company boost its sales, reach target audiences, and build brand awareness.
Featured Courses
BUSI 330 – Principles of Marketing
BUSI 331 – Marketing Research
BUSI 332 – Consumer Behavior
BUSI 453 – Applied Marketing Analysis
Highlights of Liberty’s BSBA – Marketing Analytics Online Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BS in Business Administration – Marketing Analytics degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our marketing analytics degree online is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
If you want to further your education beyond the undergraduate level, you may want to consider our online Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree.
Liberty’s digital marketing analytics courses are only 8 weeks long, with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times!
You may be eligible to earn additional college credit for relevant life experience.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/marketing-sales-management-selling/","Residential Sales Management & Professional Selling Program
With a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis: Sales Management and Professional Selling, you will master skills in consumer behavior, market research, sales management and professional selling, and retailing and category management.
You will develop skills critical to understand the needs and preferences of consumers and how to effectively engage potential customers in personal sales and retailing environments. You will learn business skills pertinent to the fields of general business, accounting, finance and marketing in both the domestic and international marketplace. Courses will prepare you to serve effectively as a business expert in the modern business world, integrating faith with learning in a professional atmosphere.
Academics: Sales Management & Professional Selling Cognate
Featured Sales Management Courses
Marketing Research (BUSI 331)
Consumer Behavior (BUSI 332)
Sales Management and Professional Selling (BUSI 431)
Retailing and Category Management (BUSI 446)
Legal & Ethical Concepts for Decision Makers (BUSI 301)
Career Opportunities in Sales Management & Professional Selling
Branch Sales Manager
Sales Representative
Insurance Agent/Broker
Sales Manager
Real Estate Agent/Broker"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/music-business/","Pursue Your Musical Calling and Foster Your Leadership Skills with Our Music Business Degree
Are you interested in music management? Do you dream of having your own record label or working with artists? You love music, and our Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Music Business degree can help you take that passion into the music industry. If you are looking for a music business degree online, look no further. Our BSBA – music business degree is designed with your success in mind so that you can impact record labels, artists, and music firms with a wealth of knowledge in the spheres of both music and business.
Our School of Music and School of Business have formed a strategic partnership to offer mentorship from professors who have extensive experience in both fields – so you can learn how to foster business management techniques as well as prepare for a career in music management.
Why Choose Liberty’s BSBA – Music Business Degree?
By choosing to be a BSBA – music student, you can open yourself up to exciting and unique opportunities. With faculty who have advanced degrees in music, business, and related fields, you can be confident that you are receiving a world-class education.
Our bachelor’s in business administration – music business degree is more than just an online business bachelor’s degree. With the music business specialization, you can have access to the resources of a music business school from the comfort of home! Since our classes are offered in an online format, you can remain invested in your church, family, and community while pursuing your degree.
With a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration – Music Business degree, you can become better equipped to pursue jobs as a tour manager, production manager, artist developer, or music manager. With the median salary of music directors and composers being $52,250 in 2020,* you could enter into a lucrative career as a music manager or director.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Music Directors and Composers (viewed online July 6, 2021). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our BS in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Music Business Degree?
When searching for colleges with music business majors, you are looking for a degree that will dive deep into the music business and help foster the skills you need while pursuing a career in the music industry. 
Our professors teach advanced music management concepts, including licensing, music agreements, operations, and music marketing. They will seek to foster your musical understanding and cover the business side of music with in-depth instruction — illuminating many of the more nuanced processes within the music industry. 
Featured Courses
CMUS 353 – Entertainment Law in the Music Industry
CMUS 354 – Music Business Agreements and Licensing
CMUS 355 – Recorded Music Operations
CMUS 356 – Music Marketing
Highlights of Our BSBA in Music Business Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You may be eligible to earn additional college credit through relevant life experience.
Our business administration programs are offered in an 8-week course format with 8 different start dates each year and no set login times.
As a student in our online music business program, you can access a wide variety of online resources through Liberty’s research portal.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/project-management/","Residential Project Management Program
The Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – Project Management specialization teaches mastery of business skills pertinent to the field of project management and organizational business practices. As you enrich your understanding of project management, you will gain the knowledge to successfully understand the scope of a project, as well as managing time, clients, and quality control.
The knowledge and experience gained through the program’s courses will prepare you to serve effectively as an expert in the business field either in a small business environment or in the global market, all while integrating faith with learning in a professional atmosphere.
Academics: Project Management Cognate
Featured Project Management Courses
Foundations of Project Management (BUSI 313)
Project Management I (BUSI 414)
Advanced Project Management (BUSI 415)
Leading Project Teams (BUSI 416)
Human Resource Management (BUSI 342)
Career Opportunities in Project Management
Project Coordinator
Project Scheduler
Assistant Project Manager
Project Manager"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/project-management/","Become a Leader in the Business World with a BSBA in Project Management Degree
Are you organized and detail-oriented? Do you love meeting challenges and working in a fast-paced environment? Are you passionate about bringing people together to accomplish the goals you’ve set?
If you answered “yes” to any of these questions, project management may be the career for you! Businesses in every industry need professionals who are good at leading a team in accomplishing particular tasks. That’s where project management comes in. Project managers are responsible for planning, overseeing, and carrying out specific projects within a company.
With Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Project Management, you can gain the leadership, communication, and critical thinking skills you need to pursue a career as a project manager in numerous fields. At Liberty, we are dedicated to helping you reach your full potential and giving you the tools you need for success. Partner with us and let us help you become a Champion for Christ in the workplace.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Why Choose Liberty University’s BSBA – Project Management Degree Online?
Our professors use innovative teaching methods to give you a quality education that prepares you for the job market. Drawing on years of real-world experience in business, our faculty provide first-hand training that will help you gain practical, on-the-job skills.
At Liberty, you’ll receive a flexible, affordable education that is designed to meet your needs and fit your lifestyle. With our BS in business administration – project management degree, you’ll complete all of your classes online. That way, you can achieve your academic and professional goals without putting your life on hold. You can focus on what really matters, like your family, job, and community, while working toward your project management degree.
Additionally, we want to help foster your spiritual growth and equip you to follow God’s calling on your life. That’s why our professors won’t just prepare you for success in your career — they’ll also help you learn how to live out biblical principles in the workplace.
The business world is growing at a rapid pace, and professionals who know how to lead with excellence and integrity are in demand across all industries. At Liberty, you can gain specialized skills that are necessary for success in project management. Join us and earn a degree that will help you take the next step in your career.
Prepare to Pursue Your CAPM Certification
Liberty’s BSBA in Project Management can help you qualify to sit for the Certified Associate in Project Management (CAPM) examination, which is a credential conferred through the Project Management Institute (PMI). In our program, you will take courses that cover the basic skills and concepts included in the exam so that you’ll be ready to pursue this certification.
The CAPM is a valuable credential that can do the following:
Demonstrate your ability to professionally navigate a variety of challenges in project management.
Give employers confidence in your ability to effectively manage projects and teams.
Help you advance in your current career.
Prepare you for new career opportunities within the field of project management.
What Will You Learn in Our Online BS in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Project Management Degree?
At Liberty, our BSBA courses are taught from a biblical perspective to help you learn the importance of integrating faith with professional knowledge. In addition, our professors can equip you with the tools and techniques needed to succeed in the business world. Project managers need to possess strong communication and interpersonal abilities, as well as skills related to multitasking, problem-solving, and time management. By earning this degree, you’ll learn all of these things and much more.
With the project management specialization, you will gain unique skills that can prepare you for a project manager role. For instance, you’ll learn how to estimate costs, develop project plans, and monitor the details of a task from start to finish.
Your courses will also cover how to acquire materials for a project, how to create and implement a project schedule, how to minimize safety risks, and how to evaluate progress and performance. In addition, you’ll explore the dynamics of communicating with both your team and upper management, as well as methods for carrying out a project as quickly and effectively as possible.
As you gain knowledge and experience through our bachelor’s in business administration – project management, you can prepare to become an expert in the business field, both in small businesses and the global market.
Featured Courses for the BSBA – Project Management Degree
BUSI 310 – Principles of Management
BUSI 313 – Foundations of Project Management
BUSI 411 – Operations Strategy
BUSI 416 – Leading Project Teams
Highlights of Liberty’s BSBA – Project Management Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BSBA in Project Management degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
These courses can help you meet the requirements to sit for the Certified Associate in Project Management (CAPM) certification through the Project Management Institute (PMI).
Our bachelor’s in business administration program is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
You may be eligible to earn additional college credit through relevant life experience.
This BSBA serves as an excellent stepping stone toward earning a Master of Business Administration, which is also offered online through Liberty.
Our business administration programs are offered in an 8-week course format, with 8 different start dates each year, and no set login times.
As a student in our online BSBA – project management program, you can access a wide variety of online resources through Liberty’s research portal.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/marketing-sales-management/","Help Your Company Excel by Earning a BSBA in Sales Management and Professional Selling
For a company to succeed, it needs more than just innovative products and services. It also needs a well-researched marketing plan and professionals who can oversee sales operations to ensure that the business connects with customers and meets sales goals. That’s where professional selling and sales management comes in. With Liberty University’s online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Sales Management and Professional Selling, you can prepare to implement effective sales techniques in a variety of industries.
In our online sales and marketing program, you will study key marketing and sales strategies like how to negotiate and close deals. With the training you receive from our seasoned faculty, you can gain skills that will help your company flourish in an increasingly competitive marketplace. Sales management involves implementing marketing plans on a practical, personal level. The people who work in professional selling play a vital role in connecting with customers.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
If you want to enter a fast-paced job that lets you bring people together, sales management may be the right fit for you!
Why Choose Liberty’s BSBA in Sales Management and Professional Selling Degree Online?
100% Online Format
Pursue a degree that works around your schedule.
Distinguished Faculty
Study under business professionals ready to share their expertise with you.
Integrity
Learn Christian ethics and principles to incorporate into your work.
Program Accreditation
Pursue your degree confidently, knowing it has met rigorous accreditation standards.
What Will You Learn in Our Business Management and Data Analysis – Sales Management and Professional Selling Bachelor’s Degree Program?
This degree includes a combination of general business classes and specialized sales courses. You’ll gain skills that can prepare you for any sector of the business field and knowledge that can equip you specifically for effective sales management.
In the core business courses, you will study a wide variety of relevant topics, including financial accounting, business law, human resource management, corporate finance, business ethics, and strategic planning. Through the concentration in sales, you will take an in-depth look at industry best practices for professional sales management.
For instance, you’ll learn how to conduct marketing research that will help your company cut costs, make wise marketing decisions, and effectively reach consumers. You’ll also explore how to:
Build positive, long-lasting relationships between your business and customers
Initiate and close sales contracts
Conduct successful retail management
With a degree in sales and marketing from Liberty, you can prepare to lead in the business field with excellence and integrity. Partner with us and prepare for an exciting, rewarding career that lets you flex your creative muscles, maximize your communications skills, and bring people together through the power of effective marketing.
Featured Courses
BUSI 331 – Marketing Research
BUSI 332 – Consumer Behavior
BUSI 431 – Sales Management and Professional Selling
BUSI 446 – Retailing and Category Management
Highlights of Our Online Bachelor’s in Business Administration – Sales Management and Professional Selling Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BSBA in Sales Management and Professional Selling degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can access a wide variety of resources through our research portal while completing sales management courses online at Liberty.
Our BSBA is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation, and having an ACBSP-accredited degree may give you a competitive advantage in the job market and help you stand out to employers.
You may be eligible to earn additional credit through relevant life experience.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/real-estate/","Uncap Your Earning Potential and Become Your Own Boss with a Bachelor’s in Business Administration – Real Estate Finance Degree
Working in real estate can be extremely rewarding. From choosing your own hours, being your own boss, and having no cap on your income to being able to genuinely help people, the satisfaction you can get from your job can be endless.
With a steady job market and the benefits of making your own schedule, a career in real estate may be a great direction for your life. If you want to make the most of this profession, having knowledge of the market, negotiation, communication skills, and integrity can help you stand out from the competition. By pursuing our online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Real Estate Finance degree from a nonprofit Christian university, you can be confident that you’ll have the opportunities to develop these vital skills and set yourself up for a successful career.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Why Choose Liberty’s Online BSBA – Real Estate Finance Degree?
For most people who pursue real estate, a bonus is the ability to make your own schedule. Why shouldn’t your degree be the same way? At Liberty, we provide flexible 8-week courses with no set login times, so you can study wherever and whenever is best for you.
We also know that your work experience is valuable. If you have previously worked in real estate or possess any professional certification in the field, you may be able to transfer in that experience for college credit!
And as always, you can transfer up to 90 credits to Liberty from other accredited universities. That’s 75% of your program that can be completed before you even begin classes with us! Partner with Liberty to earn your bachelor’s degree on your schedule.
What Will You Learn in a BS in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Real Estate Finance Degree Online?
As a BS in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Real Estate Finance online student, you can learn both the basic and advanced concepts needed for success in this competitive industry. Successful real estate professionals are persistent, dedicated, and knowledgeable. And while you bring persistence and dedication to the table yourself, college courses and a degree in real estate can give you the market insight you need to thrive. 
Our courses focus on leadership, real estate law, finance, and valuation. Your business professors, who have years of related experience, will also explain best practices for investors – making this program very useful if you plan to invest in residential or commercial real estate.
Some of the other key concepts you can learn in this program include:
Valuation and appraisal techniques for residential and income-producing properties
Legal aspects of residential and commercial real estate, such as contracts, mortgages, foreclosures, zoning, risk management, and ethical issues
Featured Courses
ACCT 211 – Financial Accounting
BUSI 310 – Principles of Management
BUSI 482 – Real Estate Valuation
PLST 222 – Real Estate Transactions and Property
Highlights of Our Online BSBA – Real Estate Finance Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online real estate degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Business Administration is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
Our business students can access a wide variety of resources through the Jerry Falwell Library search portal.
As a Liberty University student, you can create a free account with Handshake – a professional network that has more than 500 schools, over 9 million students and alumni, and over 250,000 employers in its network.
Your related experience or professional certification in real estate may be able to be transferred into Liberty as college credit!
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/public-administration/","Take the Lead in Public Service with a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration – Public Administration Degree
Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Public Administration degree is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP), so you can be confident you are receiving a quality education. Each course in our public administration specialization will help you enrich your understanding of public administration as well as the financial, professional, and administrative issues related to the federal, state, and local levels of government and nonprofit organizations. With your passion and a business administration – public administration bachelor’s degree accredited by ACBSP, you will stand out from others in your field.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Public Administration Online Degree Program?
Through our online business and government classes, you will be prepared to lead with confidence as you look forward to your career in public administration.
Liberty’s BS in Business Administration – Public Administration degree is offered completely online, giving you the ability to remain active in your job, with your family, and in your community without the worry of having to take courses on campus.
What Will You Learn Through Liberty’s Online BSBA in Public Administration Degree?
Liberty University’s online bachelor’s degree in business administration – public administration is designed to equip you with a basic understanding of government. With this understanding, you will build a solid foundation for future courses in advanced public administration and business. As you begin to examine public policy and the federal budgetary process, you can learn from professors who desire to see you succeed in your degree and the future. Our professors will help you develop skills in management, administration, finances, and service-oriented leadership. 
Throughout this degree, you will study the application of economic theory, management theory, administrative law, and political theory in the resolution of public sector management cases. In addition, you will become familiar with the content of specific laws, rules, and regulations of government agencies as imposed on the private sector and the processes by which those agencies operate. Your studies will culminate with advanced methods of business and current trends in public administration.
Featured Courses
GOVT 470 – Government Regulation of Business
PADM 360 – Introduction to Public Administration
PADM 462 – Public Financing & Budgeting
PADM 475 – Advanced Public Administration
BSBA in Public Administration Online Degree Program Highlights
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks will be provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our online bachelor’s in business administration degree program is ACBSP accredited. Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
Students may be eligible to earn additional credit through life experience.
You will have access to a wide variety of resources and materials found through Liberty University’s Jerry Falwell Library search portal while you pursue your online business administration – public administration bachelor’s degree.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/business/","Residential Bachelor of Education in Business Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Licensure
Develop skills to meet the unique learning needs of your students with a Bachelor of Education in Business Education, Grades 6-12. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses in business education. Our education methods classes are designed to give you the tools to meet the needs of every learner. You’ll learn how to utilize the strengths all students bring to the classroom. In-field classroom experiences throughout the program will allow you to put the theory you learn into practice. Classes in accounting, management, and marketing will prepare you to teach these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in business education. Liberty faculty will show you how to view teaching through a biblical worldview. You’ll be ready to make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Business Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about business and want to help learners develop the same zeal. This degree will allow you to begin a career in Business Education. You’ll have the opportunity to gain state licensure and the qualifications needed to teach students at the middle or high school level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
The Business Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) degree is also available online.
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Business Education Courses
Business Law (BUSI 301)
Principles of Management (BUSI 310)
Foundations of Project Management (BUSI 313)
Business Data Communication Systems (CSIS 330)
Principles of Microeconomics (ECON 213)
Career Opportunities in Business Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach Business Education in grades 6-12.
Secondary Business School Teacher
K-12 Education Consultant
K-12 Curriculum Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/supply-chain-management/","Residential Supply Chain Management Program
Gain knowledge of domestic and global supply logistics and sharpen your management skills through Liberty University’s residential Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – Supply Chain Management program. In today’s world, supply chain management is more and more recognized as a key source of competitive advantage and differentiation.
What is Supply Chain Management?
Supply Chain Management is the planning and processes that are required to optimize the flow of materials, information, and financial capital in a business. This then extends to demand planning, sourcing, production, inventory, and transportation.
With the B.S. in Business Administration & Data Analysis: Supply Chain Management, you’ll study under professors who are grounded in their faith and learn from their extensive real-world experience as you prepare to enter the supply chain management industry.
The supply chain cognate offers cutting-edge supply chain management skills including six sigma, supply chain mapping, supply chain digitization, and data analytics. It also includes studies in the emerging field of interplanetary supply chain networks.
Academics: Supply Chain Management Cognate
Featured Supply Chain Management Courses
Supply Chain Management (BUSI 371)
Conflict Resolution and Negotiation (BUSI 455)
Supply Chain Technology and analytics (BUSI 471)
Advanced Supply Chain Application and Policy (BUSI 473)
Career Opportunities in Supply Chain Management
Distribution Center Associate/Supervisor
Inventory Specialist/Supervisor
Logistics Coordinator
Operations Director/Manager
Production Planner
Supply Chain Analyst
Buyer
Supply Chain Consultant"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/strategic-marketing-management/","Help Your Company Reach Its Target Audience with a Degree in Strategic Marketing
Every successful company has 2 main things: innovative products and a strong marketing plan. To maximize its profits and fulfill its business goals, an organization needs to reach its target audience. That’s where strategic marketing management comes in. Strategic marketing involves helping your team carry out communications campaigns that will reach specific customers and increase earnings.
With Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration and Data Analysis (BSBA) – Strategic Marketing Management, you can learn core marketing skills that can help you lead as a strategic marketer in any industry. You’ll study how to identify potential customers and ensure customer loyalty through customized marketing campaigns.
Learn how to create, implement, and evaluate marketing plans that can maximize your company’s competitive advantages in various market segments. If you want to help your business fulfill its marketing objectives and improve its market share, our BSBA can train you for a career in strategic marketing management.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Why Choose Liberty’s Online BSBA in Strategic Marketing Management?
Our program can prepare you for a career in marketing analytics through carefully selected courses and professors who teach from a Christian worldview. Join us and earn a degree that will help you meet your career goals.
Christian Principles
Our courses are taught from a biblical worldview, and our professors can equip you to integrate a Christian worldview with effective marketing principles. We want to help you be the best at whatever you feel called to be and prepare you to practice ethical living in the workplace. Partner with us and become a Champion for Christ.
Experienced Faculty
Our BSBA faculty have years of professional experience in business, and they are qualified to offer you first-hand training in the areas of strategic analysis and marketing activity. With their instruction, you will gain a skill set that can equip you to lead in the world of business with confidence.
Flexibility
At Liberty, our goal is to help you earn your degree in a way that fits your lifestyle. With our B.S. in Strategic Marketing Management, you’ll complete all of your courses online, allowing you to remain active in your job, family, and community. You can work toward your diploma without putting your life on hold.
What Will You Learn in Our BS in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Strategic Marketing Management Online Program?
Learn the essentials of strategic marketing management, which include how to get inside the minds of consumers, utilize distribution channels, and carry out well-planned promotional strategies. You will also explore how to conduct market research and cater to your target customers – allowing your company to increase its productivity and efficiency.
In your marketing management courses, you’ll gain a broad skill set that can help you create a strong marketing and branding image for your business. For instance, you’ll study how to research consumer behavior and use this research to set strategic marketing goals. Most importantly, Liberty’s degree in marketing will give you a sense of readiness when faced with problem-solving tasks in the workforce.
This degree will dive into many topics related to the creation and implementation of marketing plans, such as competitor analysis, customer relations, brand management, digital marketing, channel development, and merchandising. Your strategic marketing courses will also further your knowledge of customer acquisition, consumption, and disposal of products and services.
With industries becoming more competitive than ever, companies need strategic marketers who understand the process behind developing a marketing plan. Lead your team to success with Liberty’s online bachelor’s degree in strategic marketing management.
Featured Courses
BUSI 331 – Marketing Research
BUSI 332 – Consumer Behavior
BUSI 430 – Promotion Strategy
BUSI 438 – Marketing Brand Management
Highlights of Our BS in Marketing Management Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BSBA in Strategic Marketing Management degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our B.S. in Business Administration is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
You may be eligible to earn additional credit for relevant life experience.
You can access a wide variety of resources through Liberty’s research portal."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/business/","Prepare for More with Liberty’s Licensure-Track B.Ed. in Business Education 
Is your dream to become a teacher? Are you looking for a degree that provides career flexibility and training in the subjects that interest you most? Liberty’s Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Business Education for 6-12 grade students can help. Whether you want to teach business to middle school or secondary students, our B.Ed. business degree is the path to get you there. 
By completing courses in the licensure track, you will walk away with a degree that can prepare you to teach business classes in public and private school settings. Because our degree contains a core set of business classes, you can also be prepared for work in the business industry. 
Give yourself more options by choosing a degree that provides job opportunities you know will be rewarding for years to come. 
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor of Education Program?
Liberty’s unique licensure-track B.Ed. programs provide 100% online, Virginia Department of Education (VDOE) approved courses. With hands-on experience through student teaching and practicums in a classroom near you, you can learn to apply teaching theory to real-world problems. 
With Liberty’s mission to Train Champions for Christ, you can be confident that you’ll study under dedicated professors who teach from a biblical worldview and are passionate about building up teachers who pursue excellence and Christ-like compassion. Our faculty have years of experience in their fields and will help you learn how to seamlessly integrate biblical principles into your profession. 
Designed to provide maximum flexibility and convenience as a fully online program, our bachelor’s degree in business education for 6-12 grade students can give you the foundation you need to thrive as a teacher — without ever having to travel to a university campus. 
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s Degree in Business Education? 
Liberty’s B.Ed. in Business Education is broken down into 4 major components: education courses, practicum and gate courses, business courses, and student teaching. Your education courses explore the major aspects any teacher has to learn, such as evaluating student learning, creating curriculums, and evaluating behavioral and individual differences between students. 
As a business education student, you can complete additional courses focused on a wide range of relevant topics, such as accounting, business law, management, marketing, entrepreneurship, and information systems. The practicum and student teaching courses will then put your knowledge to the test. You’ll work in the classroom alongside a licensed teacher to see how the principles you’ve learned apply in the real world. 
Featured Courses
ACCT 211 – Financial Principles
BUSI 301 – Legal and Ethical Concepts for Decision Makers 
BUSI 313 – Foundations of Project Management 
BUSI 320 – Finance Principles
Highlights of Our B.Ed. Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field. 
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Graduate with licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia. 
Complete 90 in-person practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation. 
Observe and teach in a variety of school settings with your required practicum and student teaching hours. 
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/chemistry/","B.S. in Chemistry
Residential Chemistry Program
Request Info Apply Now
The Bachelor of Science in Chemistry degree program at Liberty University prepares students for employment or graduate studies in the molecular sciences by providing a broad-based, lab-intensive chemistry curriculum taught from a biblical worldview.
Design features in chemical systems, as well as chemical methods and theories relevant to the origin of life, are integrated into the curriculum. In the upper-level laboratories, students work with faculty using state-of-the-art chemical instrumental methods. Research opportunities further prepare chemistry graduates for professional opportunities and postgraduate education.
The B.S. in Chemistry is offered through the Department of Biology & Chemistry.
Teach Chemistry with Your B.Ed. Degree
Turn your passion for chemistry into a fulfilling teaching career. With a Bachelor of Education (B.Ed) degree in Chemistry Education 6-12, you can get the licensure you need to teach in this field.
Learn more about the B.Ed. 
Academics: Chemistry (B.S.)
Featured Courses
Biochemistry I & II (BCHM 451, 452)
Organic Chemistry I & II (CHEM 301, 302)
Physical Chemistry I & II (CHEM 461, 462)
Analytical Chemistry (CHEM 321)
Instrumental Analysis (CHEM 322)
Career Opportunities in Chemistry
Analytical Chemistry
Chemical Laboratory Technician
Chemical/Pharmaceutical Laboratory Supervisor
Chemistry Graduate School
Computational/Theoretical Chemist
Cosmetics
Dietary Scientist
Environmental Scientist
Food Chemistry
Forensic Chemist
Forensic Scientist
Government
High School Chemistry Teacher
Industrial/Environmental Laboratory Analyst
Industrial Sales, Marketing, and Technical Service
Laboratory Analyst
National Laboratories
Physician
Principal Researcher in Chemistry
Production Chemist
Quality Assurance
Quality Control
Regulatory Agencies
Research and Development
Research Assistant
Scientific Writing
Toxicology"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/camp-and-outdoor-adventure-leadership/","Residential Camp & Outdoor Leadership Program
The B.S. in Camp and Outdoor Adventure Leadership strategically prepares you with the Biblical foundation and professional skills you’ll need for planning, organizing, programming, and marketing Christian camping and outdoor adventure ministry programs. You will not only prepare for this effective evangelism and discipleship strategy, but you will discover how you could fit into one of the many career opportunities in the camp and outdoor adventure leadership profession.
Meet COAL director, Keith Oglesby
Explore our Program of Study 
Get Hands-On Experience In:
Facilitating initiative games, team building activities, high and low ropes courses, water sports activity training, individual and team sports skill development, and adventure activities
Fundraising and board development, facility and activity site planning, staff recruitment, staff management, and staff development
Marketing one of the best strategies available for the evangelism and discipleship of people of all ages
Get Started with Your Biblical Studies Degree
Career Opportunities in Camp & Outdoor Adventure
Camp Executive Director
Camp Chief Financial Officer
Wilderness Guide
Camp Media / Marketing Ministry
Camp Human Resources / Benefits"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/bible/theology/","Gain a Foundational Understanding of Biblical Theology and Prepare for Ministry Roles with Liberty’s Bible Degree in Theology Online
Are you interested in learning more about the Bible and theology? Perhaps you have a heart for ministry and a passion for God’s Word – and you’d like to grow in both areas. If so, Liberty’s 100% online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Bible – Theology may be a great fit for you.
As one of the largest Christian universities in the world, we understand that humanity is in desperate need of Christ. People across the globe constantly search for answers and purpose in things that can provide neither. You can use this online theology degree to minister to such people and help them find answers in God’s Word – the only resource that provides true meaning and purpose to the lost.
The Bible is much more than just a book, and theology is more than just a subject – it is a crown jewel of the sciences. If you feel a tug on your heart to pursue ministry and dedicate your career to the service of God’s kingdom, choose Liberty’s Bible studies degree in theology online.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bible Degree Online in Theology?
While many colleges and universities offer biblical and theological degrees, few universities can offer you a history as steeped in God’s Word as Liberty can. Since 1971, our mission has been to Train Champions for Christ. Our commitment to that mission has brought us from humble roots as a small Bible college nestled in the mountains of Central Virginia to a university with over 100,000 students studying across the globe. When you choose Liberty, you don’t just choose a school – you choose a university dedicated to equipping tomorrow’s Christian leaders with the skills and knowledge needed to be lights in a fallen world.
In addition, we have been pioneering distance education since 1985. We understand what it takes to design a degree that offers you everything you’re looking for in higher education. With a 100% online curriculum, convenient 8-week courses, no set login times, and no required intensives, our Bible degree in theology online allows you to further your education while remaining committed to the things that matter most – like your job, family, and community.
What Will You Learn in Our Bible Studies Degree in Theology?
Our BS in Bible degree online – theology consists of 3 main sections: general education classes, Bible courses, and theology classes. Each Bible and theology class woven into this program was carefully developed and handpicked to offer you an optimal academic experience.
In the Bible section of this degree, you will explore nearly every word of the Bible – from Genesis to Revelation. Topics of particular emphasis include Daniel-Revelation, the general and Pauline epistles, and the Pentateuch. You will also study research and writing for religious disciplines, biblical theology, and much more. Upon completion of the Bible-specific courses, you can feel an increased confidence in your knowledge of the Bible and how to share it with others.
In this degree’s theology online courses, you will venture into a more in-depth study of theological principles. You will study the theology of humanity, the person and work of Christ, and the theology of the family. In addition, you will examine and learn to apply biblical and theological concepts. Each of our courses is taught by expert professors who have a passion for your success, so you can feel confident that this degree can help prepare you for a career upon graduation.
Lastly, this online theology degree affords you the opportunity to study other topics you’re passionate about through 12-18 credit hours of elective courses. In this section, you can choose to continue studying the Bible and theology, explore another ministry-related area such as Christian counseling, or branch into new topics entirely – like business, writing, or geography.
Featured Courses
THEO 310 – Theology of Humanity
THEO 313 – The Person and Work of Christ
THEO 330 – Theology of the Family
THEO 415 – Examining and Applying Biblical and Theological Concepts
Highlights of Our Online Bible Degree in Theology
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online Bible degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can complete your BS in Bible degree in as little as 3.5 years!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/biblical-studies/","Residential Biblical Studies Degree
Explore the Old Testament, New Testament, biblical languages, and backgrounds of the biblical era with our B.A. in Biblical Studies. Through our program, you’ll gain a well-rounded biblical degree that you will be able to put to work immediately in writing, teaching, ministry, and pursuing graduate education.
Academics: B.A. in Biblical Studies
Biblical Studies Courses
Theology Survey I (THEO 201)
Greek Grammar I (GREK 201)
Genesis (BIBL 410)
Daniel-Revelation (BIBL 450)
Hermeneutics (BIBL 480)
Get Started with Your Biblical Studies Degree
Career Opportunities With This Degree
Christian Educator
Church Leadership
Evangelism
Missions
Para-church Ministries
Graduate School/Seminary"
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/biochemistry-molecular-biology/","Residential Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Program
The Bachelor of Science in Biochemistry & Molecular Biology major offers a curriculum in which students study the chemical basis for the structure and function within biological systems. Students will study God’s complex creation at the organismic, cellular, molecular, and atomic levels.
The curriculum is designed to provide a strong foundation in biological and chemical concepts and to provide research-level laboratory experiences. Upon completing the Biochemistry degree, a student will have the knowledge and skills to pursue professional careers or post-graduate training in areas such as immunology, toxicology, pharmacology, neurochemistry, bioorganic, bioinorganic, and biophysical chemistry.
Because you train directly under your professors, rather than graduate students or teaching assistants, you will be exceptionally prepared to succeed in professional or graduate school.
The B.S. in Biochemistry & Molecular Biology is offered through the Department of Biology and Chemistry.
Academics: Biochemistry & Molecular Biology (B.S.)
Featured Courses
Biochemistry I & II (BCHM 451, 452)
Organic Chemistry I & II (CHEM 301, 302)
Physical Chemistry I & II (CHEM 461, 462)
Genetics (BIOL 301)
Microbiology (BIOL 303)
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities in Biochemistry & Molecular Biology
Agricultural Biotechnology
College Professor/Researcher
Dentistry
Optometry
Pharmaceuticals
Physician
Physicians Assistant
Veterinarian"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/biblical-counseling/","Develop a Biblical Foundation for Helping Others with Liberty’s Online Biblical Counseling Degree
Are you interested in helping others through ministry and want to learn how to counsel biblically? The field of biblical counseling is growing fast, and many churches and ministries are looking for people who have both knowledge of the Bible and counseling skills. As a biblical counselor, you can guide and support those who are struggling with their mental health or spiritual issues. Being a Christian counselor means teaching others to look at their problems from a Christian perspective.
Liberty University offers a 100% online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Biblical Counseling, which can teach you how to use the Bible to help others. By earning this degree, you can develop the skills needed to communicate the Christian faith in counseling situations in a way that aligns with biblical values.
Why Choose Liberty’s BS in Biblical Counseling Degree?
If you are interested in pursuing a Christian counseling degree, Liberty University is an excellent choice. At Liberty, you’ll have the opportunity to receive a rigorous and well-respected education that can equip you with the resources and tools needed to enter into ministry.
Here are a few key benefits of earning your online degree through Liberty University:
Classes are offered in flexible 8-week blocks, which means you can complete your degree from anywhere with an internet connection.
Liberty University provides competitive tuition rates and a wide range of financial aid options to help you fund your education.
Liberty University is accredited by SACSCOC, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges.
Liberty University is one of the leading academic institutions of theological training, making it an ideal choice if you are interested in pursuing a degree in biblical counseling. With our accreditation, online programs, flexible course schedule, and commitment to academic quality and affordability, the online biblical counseling degree can help equip you with the tools needed to enter your desired career field.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Biblical Counseling Degree?
Our bachelor’s degree in biblical counseling provides you with a unique opportunity to integrate your Christian faith with counseling skills to help others in a profound way. You can gain the ability to effectively communicate accurate biblical truth and counseling methods that can result in mature, value-driven behavior. Gaining a holistic approach to counseling that considers both the psychological and spiritual aspects of a person’s life can be some of the skills you develop as a student in Liberty University’s online biblical counseling degree program.
During the BS in biblical counseling program, you’ll be taught an overview of both the theory and practice of biblical counseling. You will be provided with a theological framework through which you can help people analyze their problems and move toward lasting solutions. Courses within the program will also cover biblical topics and books of the Bible in detail, including the book of Acts, the Gospels, major and minor prophets, and the Pauline Epistles.
Additionally, you can learn how to interpret each major genre of both the Old and New Testaments. The program also includes introductory psychology classes, along with classes specifically designed to combine psychology with biblical principles. Throughout the program, you can gain skills in scholarly research of the Bible, effective communication of the Bible, and critical thinking with a biblical worldview.
Featured Courses
BCOU 210 – Introduction to Biblical Counseling
BCOU 300 – Theological Basis for Biblical Counseling
BCOU 310 – Biblical Counseling and the Psychologies
BCOU 400 – Contemporary Issues in Biblical Counseling
Course guides coming soon
Highlights of Our Biblical Counseling Degree 
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
The BS in Biblical Counseling is aligned with the overall vision of the John W. Rawlings School of Divinity, which is to come alongside the local church by providing training for leaders in ministry.
The biblical counseling program is taught by Spirit-filled faculty and staff who seek to help students develop the fruits of the Spirit.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/biblical-and-theological-studies/","Become an Effective Educator with a Bachelor’s Degree in Biblical and Educational Studies – Biblical and Theological Studies
You love working with children and equipping them for success. You are passionate about sharing the Gospel and helping others grasp biblical truth. You want to combine your passion for education and theology into an exciting, rewarding career.
If that sounds like you, Liberty’s online B.S. in Biblical and Educational Studies – Biblical and Theological Studies can help. This program is designed to help meet the growing need for biblically trained teachers in today’s Christian education system. With our bachelor’s in biblical studies, you can pursue work as a non-licensed teacher in private school or homeschool settings.
As a Christian teacher, you’ll have the unique opportunity to teach not just regular school subjects, but also Bible and theology courses. You can help children develop vital life skills and a deeper understanding of the Bible — and, as a Christian university, Liberty can help provide the tools you need to do just that.
What is biblical education?
What is an education studies degree?
What jobs can an education studies degree lead to?
What’s the difference between biblical studies and theology?
Why Choose Liberty’s Christian Education Degree Online?
Flexibility | Our bachelor’s degree in Christian education is offered 100% online, and the classes have no set login times. That means you can complete your coursework wherever and whenever it’s most convenient for you!
High-Quality Academics | Liberty is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). Additionally, our bachelor’s in biblical and educational studies is recognized by the Association of Christian Schools International (ACSI). You can be confident that your degree from Liberty has met rigorous academic standards and accreditation requirements.
Path to Certification | After completing Liberty’s educational and biblical studies degree, you could pursue your ACSI teaching certificate. This is a valuable credential that can help enable you to teach Bible courses in most Christian schools.
Experienced Faculty | Liberty University’s Bible classes and education courses are taught by professors who have years of experience in Christian ministry and academia. With their guidance, you can develop the skills you need to become an effective educator.
What Will You Learn in Liberty University’s Biblical Studies and Education Classes?
Learn how to help children of all ages thrive in the classroom and in their walk with Christ.
In this program, you’ll explore core education topics, including learning theory, educational philosophy, and classroom management. You’ll also develop a portfolio and complete a 300-hour teaching practicum, allowing you to gain valuable on-the-job experience that can help boost your résumé and enhance your skill set.
In addition to honing your teaching abilities, this program provides a mix of religion, Bible, theology, and apologetics courses. These classes can strengthen your understanding of Scripture and help you prepare to teach theological concepts and church history to students of all ages.
Our educational studies major offers training in biblical teaching, curriculum development, and best teaching methods so you can succeed as a Christian school teacher. You can become equipped to develop Bible lessons and teach Scripture in a way that promotes understanding and real-world application.
Highlights of Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Educational Studies Degree Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online biblical and educational studies degree online from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
After completing your bachelor’s in Christian education online degree, you may want to pursue teaching licensure through our Master of Arts in Teaching program.
Liberty graduates are often sought after by prestigious companies for their integrity, personal discipline, and versatility.
Most of our online courses are only 8 weeks long with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
You can access a wealth of resources through our top-notch research portal while completing your online education studies degree.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/general-biology/","B.S. in General Biology
Residential General Biology Program
Gain a broad and well-developed understanding of the biological sciences including botany, zoology, genetics, cell biology, and ecology. With a Bachelor of Science in General Biology degree, you will study God’s complex creation from the molecular to the ecosystem level.
Upper-level courses will give you research experience in both laboratory and field settings. Get the knowledge and skills you need to pursue postgraduate education as well as a professional career in laboratory work.
The B.S. in General Biology is offered through the Department of Biology and Chemistry.
Teach Biology with Your B.Ed. Degree
Turn your passion for the biological sciences into a fulfilling teaching career. With a Bachelor of Education (B.Ed) degree in Biology Education 6-12, you can get the licensure you need to teach in this field.
Learn more about the B.Ed. 
Academics: General Biology (B.S.)
Featured Courses
Genetics (BIOL 301)
Ecology (BIOL 310)
Botany (BIOL 317)
Cell Biology (BIOL 415)
Organic Chemistry I & II (CHEM 301, 302)
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities
General Biology
Veterinarian
Environmental Scientist
Biomedical Laboratory Supervisor
Agricultural Biotechnologist"
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/biomedical-sciences-pre-med/","Residential Pre-Med Program
The Bachelor of Science in Biomedical Sciences (Pre-Med) program at Liberty University is designed to prepare students for medical school, pharmacy school, dental school, physician assistant school, and related medical fields.
With a broad coverage of cell biology, genetics, biochemistry, and advanced human anatomy and physiology, the Pre-Med program is intentionally aimed at maximizing your performance on the Medical College Admission Test (MCAT). Each year a high percentage of our students are admitted into medical schools. While students interested in research have the option to take advanced courses with labs, several lecture-only courses (such as clinical anatomy and advanced physiology) were created specifically for this program.
In addition to our rigorous courses, the student-led Pre-Med Honors Society regularly invites local physicians to speak to students and holds special meetings with Kaplan representatives. Most medical schools seek more than a strong academic record from their applicants; they like to see a demonstrated desire to practice medicine, altruism, and good character. Liberty University provides numerous opportunities to participate in medical missions trips, shadow local doctors, acquire internships, and perform Christian service in the community.
Students who are interested in becoming a physician’s assistant should take BIOL 214 & 216 labs.
The B.S. in Biomedical Sciences (Pre-Med) is offered through the Department of Biology & Chemistry.
Academic Information
Courses You Could Take
General Biology I (BIOL 224)
Biology Seminar (BIOL 400)
Cell Biology (BIOL 415)
General Chemistry I (CHEM 121)
Organic Chemistry I (CHEM 301)
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities in Biomedical Sciences
Physician*
Pharmacist*
Dentist*
Physical Therapist*
Research Scientist
Public Health Laboratories
Pharmaceutical Companies
Physician Assistant*
Medical Diagnostics
Clinical Research Scientist
*Requires graduate-level education"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/biology/","Residential Bachelor of Education in Biology Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Licensure
Discover how to meet the unique learning needs of your students with a Bachelor of Education in Biology Education, Grades 6-12. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses from a science-integrated approach. Our education methods classes are designed to give you the tools to meet the needs of every learner. You’ll learn how to utilize the strengths all students bring to the classroom. In-field classroom experiences throughout the program will allow you to put the theory you learn into practice. Classes in chemistry, anatomy, and genetics will prepare you to teach these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in science education. Liberty faculty will show you how to view teaching through a biblical worldview. You’ll be ready to make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Biology Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about God’s creation and want to help learners develop the same zeal. This degree will allow you to begin a career in Biology Education. You’ll have the opportunity to gain state licensure and the qualifications needed to teach students at the middle or high school level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Biology Education Courses
Biochemistry I (BCHM 451)
Genetics (BIOL 301)
Ecology (BIOL 310)
Advanced Human Physiology (BIOL 385)
History of Life (CRST 290)
Career Opportunities in Biology Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach Biology Education in grades 6-12.
Secondary Biology School Teacher
K-12 Education Consultant
K-12 Curriculum Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/biotechnology/","B.S. in Biotechnology
Residential Biotechnology Program
The Bachelor of Science in Biotechnology major prepares you for a career in the biotech industry. The emphasis throughout the curriculum is placed on genes and the integrative complexity of the cell. You’ll gain an appreciation of how fearfully and wonderfully made we are as they study the details at the molecular level.
Freshman and sophomore courses are designed to provide a solid foundation in biology and chemistry as well as basic laboratory skills and safety. In the upper-level courses, you’ll use state of the art equipment techniques such as PCR amplification of DNA, protein electrophoresis, column chromatography isolation techniques, characterization of fatty acids and lipids, genetic engineering of mutant bacteria strains, and generation of vaccines. You’ll also engage in team-based research projects to simulate the interdisciplinary approach in modern science.
Successful students have gone on to Ph.D. programs, medical school or laboratory employment. This program includes a chemistry minor which can be added by request.
The B.S. in Biotechnology is offered through the Department of Biology & Chemistry.
Liberty University Department of Biology & Chemistry is a member of Virginia Bio, which connects students to jobs and internships at biotech companies throughout the state.
Academics
Featured Courses
Genetics (BIOL 301)
Microbiology (BIOL 303)
Cell Biology (BIOL 415)
Molecular Techniques (BIOL 455)
Analytical Chemistry (CHEM 231)
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities
Physician (M.D./Ph.D.)
College Professor/Researcher
Biomedical Laboratory Supervisor
Industrial Laboratory Technician
Laboratory Research Assistant"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/","Residential Business Administration Program
The Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis presents a unique program of study that not only presents a strong foundation in business and managerial principles but also provides students the opportunity to select a concentration that represents a particular area of interest and expertise. These specializations and concentrations reflect the diverse skill sets of our students and range from economics to financial management to project management—all of which integrate faith with learning in a professional atmosphere.
Business students will also have ample opportunity to serve their community, explore the possibilities of an internship, and join a student organization in their field of study that will help hone business acumen, increase networking opportunities, and expose the student to exceptional leaders from local and national organizations, greatly enhancing the classroom experience.
View the Business Administration & Data Analysis (B.S.) program of study
Business Administration & Data Analysis Cognates
Automotive Dealership Management –Residential & Online
Communications – Residential & Online
Data Analytics – Residential & Online
Digital Marketing & Advertising – Residential & Online
Economics – Residential & Online
Entrepreneurship – Residential
Finance – Residential & Online
Financial Planning – Residential & Online
Green and Sustainable Management – Online
Healthcare Management – Residential & Online
Human Resource Management – Residential & Online
Humanitarian Aid – Residential
International Business – Residential & Online
Leadership – Online
Marketing Analytics – Residential & Online
Sales Management & Professional Selling – Residential & Online
Music Business – Online
Project Management – Residential & Online
Public Administration – Online
Real Estate – Online
Strategic Marketing Management – Online
Supply Chain Management – Residential
Start Your Career in Business Administration & Data Analysis
Teach Business with Your B.Ed. Degree
Turn your passion for business into a fulfilling teaching career. With a Bachelor of Education (B.Ed) degree in Business Education 6-12, you can get the licensure you need to teach in this field.
Learn more about the B.Ed.
Career Opportunities in Business Administration & Data Analysis
Advertising and Public Relations
Business Marketing
Consulting
Corporate Communications
Event Management
Economist
Sales Analyst
Actuary
Financial Analysts
Loan Officer
Entrepreneur
Franchise owner/investor
E-commerce
Small business management
Financial Planner
Investment Management
Mortgage Banking
Pension and 401(k) Management
Foreign Exchange Manager
International Marketing Manager
Market Research
Brand Management
HR Manager
Human Resources Director"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/communications/","Residential Business Administration & Data Analysis – Communications Program
The Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – Communications degree will help you master the valuable skills pertinent to today’s business environment. Successfully prepare for a professional career by enriching your knowledge and understanding of communication theory and best practices. Gain insight into the consumer mindset, as you advance your expertise in time management, teamwork, research, organization, and critical thinking skills.
Coursework will prepare you to serve effectively as an expert in both a small business environment or in the global market, integrating faith with learning in a professional atmosphere. In addition to the required core classes on the degree completion plan, each student is required to complete various classes that specialize in communications.
Academics: Communications Cognate
Featured Business Communications Courses
Media Writing (JOUR 225)
Media and Culture (SCOM 110)
Persuasion (SCOM 345)
Digital/Social/Mobile Communication Strategies (STCO 356)
Strategic Communication (STCO 307)
Career Opportunities in Communications
Advertising and Public Relations
Business Marketing
Communications Manager
Consulting
Corporate Communications
Event Management"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/","Future Leaders Can Excel with an Online Business Administration Degree from Liberty University
Do you want to get the skills you need to succeed in the business world? If so, Liberty University’s online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis can help you master skills that apply to both domestic and global marketplaces.
With Liberty’s Bachelor of Business Administration and Data Analysis online, you can learn valuable, marketable skills in general business, accounting, finance, and marketing. Our accredited online business administration degree can help you launch a career in almost any industry you choose. Liberty’s BSBA program can also help you improve your leadership, management, and human resource skills as you prepare to make an impact in the modern business world.
Liberty’s online BSBA vs. online BBA degrees
A Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA) or a Bachelor of Arts in Business Administration often has more liberal arts courses. Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) focuses on practical skills instead. Our program is designed to provide you with specialized, time-tested training for your industry’s unique needs. With our areas of study, you can learn the most useful and marketable skills for your field.
A bachelor’s degree in business management from Liberty University could be the credential you need to launch your career to new heights, pursue your dreams, and compete for rewarding, well-paying job opportunities. The time to pursue a business administration degree online has never been better, and at Liberty, we make earning your online business degree as simple as possible. 
At Liberty, you can enjoy a business degree that is offered 100% online in 8-week sections with no set login times and no required intensives. We understand that you have commitments, and we also understand that those commitments don’t go away when you begin a degree program. That’s why we’ve designed our online business degrees to be flexible and accommodating to your busy schedule. 
Partner with us, gain valuable knowledge, and earn a business degree online that can help you launch your career to new heights. 
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Business Degree?
Liberty’s 100% online business degree is designed to Train Champions for Christ. At Liberty, our professors teach students how to successfully lead as professionals with grace and integrity. Liberty’s goal is to provide a world-class education with a biblical worldview.
With that goal in mind, we work hard to make sure that our degrees meet high academic standards. Our Bachelor of Business Administration is accredited through the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). We are held accountable by ACBSP for quality business education, and we meet this standard while proudly teaching biblical values. This helps Liberty’s graduates stand out as principled, ethical professionals.
If you attended another school and have transfer credits you’d like to apply towards your business management degree online, Liberty allows you to transfer in up to 75% of an undergraduate degree program. To learn more about which of your previously earned credits may apply to our online Bachelor of Business Administration, please see our transfer credit page.
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America.
Highlights of Our Online Bachelor of Business Administration and Data Analysis
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
Students enrolled in our online business administration degree can access a wide variety of resources through Liberty’s research portal."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/communications/","Advance Your Career with an Online Business Communications Degree
Strong communication skills are necessary to succeed in any career – especially within the ever-growing field of business. Companies across all industries need professionals who understand how to handle finances and business operations and communicate well in speech and writing with management, colleagues, and the public.
With Liberty University’s online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Communications, you can enhance your communication, business, and leadership skills and prepare for success in the competitive business industry. By enriching your knowledge of communication strategies and business practices, our program can give you a leg up in the professional world.
Are you interested in a rewarding, fast-paced career that lets you bring people together and lead your company to success? If so, a business communications degree is a great next step to take in your academic journey. Our BSBA program will give you insight into the consumer mindset as you become an expert in time management, teamwork, research, organization, and critical thinking.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Why Choose Liberty’s Online BSBA in Communications Program?
Dedicated Faculty | Our BSBA classes are taught by faculty who have years of experience in the business industry. Drawing on what they have learned in their own careers, they can foster your professional development and equip you with tools that will help you stand out to employers. With their guidance, you can prepare for an exciting career in a wide variety of fields, including marketing, public relations, or human resources.
Flexibility | At Liberty, our goal is to help you achieve your academic goals in a way that fits your schedule and lifestyle. That’s why we’ve designed our business communications degree to be completely online. With this format, you can pursue a higher education without putting your life on hold. You’ll be able to complete your classes while still investing in your family, job, and community.
Professional Ethics | What sets Liberty apart from other schools that offer business degrees? We won’t just teach you on-the-job skills and help you prepare for a future job – we can also help you grow spiritually and equip you to live out your faith in the workplace. We are dedicated to Training Champions for Christ, so your business classes will be taught from a biblical worldview. That way, you can learn how to integrate biblical principles with industry best practices.
Program Accreditation | Liberty’s online BSBA program is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). This credential demonstrates our commitment to teaching excellence and to offering an education that prepares you for the real world. With an accredited business administration degree from Liberty, you can be confident in your knowledge and skills as you enter the competitive business industry.
What Will You Learn in Our BS in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Communications Degree Program?
Our BSBA in Communications teaches both fundamental business skills and strategies for effective communication. Your business classes will cover a wide range of topics like financial accounting, business law, corporate finance, organizational ethics, and human resource management. Under the guidance of our seasoned faculty, you can prepare to serve as an ethical industry leader in small business environments, corporate arenas, or the global market.
For the online communications cognate, you’ll take several courses that can enhance your verbal and written communications skills. For instance, in our media writing class, you will practice basic storytelling techniques and learn how to reach your target audience through strong written copy. You will also explore the fundamentals of modern mass communication and how to use digital communication to create targeted messaging, persuade audiences, and establish positive relationships with consumers.
After completing this degree, you’ll have a working knowledge of how to write news stories, produce copy for broadcast, and create an advertising package. You’ll also receive valuable experience in carrying out marketing campaigns via the web and social media. With the skills you’ll gain in Liberty’s BSBA program, you can expand your career opportunities and lead with excellence in the business field.
Featured Courses in the Business Communications Degree
JOUR 225 – Media Writing
SCOM 110 – Media and Culture
STCO 307 – Strategic Communication
STCO 356 – Digital/Social/Mobile Marketing
Highlights of Our BSBA – Communications Degree Online
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BSBA in Communications degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our BSBA is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
Our BS in Business Administration is an excellent stepping-stone toward earning a Master of Business Administration, which is also offered online through Liberty.
As an online student at Liberty, you can access a wide variety of resources through our research portal."
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/data-analytics/","Residential Data Analytics Program
Today’s data-driven marketplace has a growing need for business professionals with technical and analytical skills. With your Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – Data Analytics cognate, you’ll learn how to think critically and make decisions utilizing vast amounts of data.
With the data analytics cognate, you will evaluate business environments and study industry best practices. You will also learn how to develop appropriate business strategies, policies, and solutions for a sustainable competitive advantage.
Explore topics like:
Business analytics, with an emphasis on descriptive-analytical techniques and theory
Methods of data collection and its impact and variation in a business setting
Prescriptive and predictive analytics
Collecting data and discovering data patterns
Selecting appropriate forecasting techniques
Time series and regression forecasting techniques
Extracting meaning from Structured Query Language (SQL) and data modeling for decision making
Real-world context analyses utilizing data sets and case studies
Academics: Data Analytics Cognate
Featured Data Analytics Courses
Business Analytics I (BUSI 333)
Database Concepts for Analytics (BUSI 341)
Forecasting & Predictive Analytics (BUSI 405)
Practical Analytics (BUSI 454)
Career Opportunities in Data Analytics
Data Analyst
Consumer Marketing Analyst
Data Analytics Consultant
Quantitative Analyst"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/digital-marketing-advertising/","Residential Digital Marketing & Advertising Program
With a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – Digital Marketing and Advertising, you will master skills in market research, digital marketing, and advertising. You will develop skills critical to understand the needs and preferences of consumers and how to attract, convert, and retain customers through digital content.
You will learn business skills pertinent to the fields of general business, accounting, finance, and marketing in both the domestic and international marketplace. Courses will prepare you to serve effectively as a business expert in the modern business world, integrating faith with learning in a professional atmosphere.
Academics: Digital Marketing & Advertising Cognate
Featured Digital Marketing Courses
Marketing Research (BUSI 331)
Digital Marketing in a Virtual World (BUSI 436)
Conversion and Optimization (BUSI 439)
Customer Retention Through Digital Marketing (BUSI 442)
Human Resource Management (BUSI 342)
Career Opportunities in Digital Marketing & Advertising
Financial Analysts
Investment Banker
Management Consultant
Loan Officer
Real Estate Agent/Broker
Securities Analyst
Entrepreneur"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/digital-marketing-and-advertising/","Help Your Company Grow with an Online Marketing Bachelor’s Degree
In today’s world, digital marketing and advertising are not an option for businesses – they are integral aspects of a healthy company. Without digital marketing efforts, businesses lose a major avenue of potential growth. By earning an online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Digital Marketing and Advertising from Liberty, you can become well versed in the world of digital marketing and the key performance indicators that measure the success of digital marketing efforts.
With a degree in digital marketing, you can help businesses identify areas of strength as well as areas that need improvement. Without expertise like this, many businesses are not able to keep up with their competitors. With a broad business knowledge in conjunction with digital marketing expertise, you can change a business from the inside out.
So what are you waiting for? Whether you are a seasoned veteran in digital marketing or you are just beginning, earning an online business marketing degree from Liberty can help as you prepare to take the next step in your career.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Why Choose Liberty’s Digital Marketing Degree Online?
Our online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) is designed to develop your technical, creative, and business skills so that you can become more competitive in your field. With this online marketing degree, you’ll learn from professors who have years of experience in the business world. Drawing on what they have learned in their own careers, they can help equip you with the tools you need to stand out to employers.
We believe you can pursue your educational goals without putting your life on hold. That’s why our digital marketing major is offered 100% online with no set login times – designed to fit your schedule and needs. You can log into your classes from the comfort of home and fit your coursework around your other priorities — like your family and job.
In addition to world-class professors and the flexibility of pursuing your bachelor of business administration online, Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). With recognition like this, you can be confident you are earning a top-notch credential.
What Will You Learn in Our Business Administration and Data Analysis – Digital Marketing and Advertising Online Bachelor’s Degree?
As you search for a digital marketing university, we know that the quality of your education is an important factor. Alongside general business classes, you’ll complete specialized courses that will cover a variety of digital marketing strategies like site optimization, web analytics, mobile marketing, and customer retention.
Our digital marketing degree can prepare you to serve effectively in small business environments, corporate arenas, and the global market. Companies across all industries need people who are up to date on the latest trends in digital communications. This program is designed to give you a skill set that is highly sought after in the job market.
For instance, you’ll learn basic techniques for both attracting and retaining customers. Your courses will dive into the minds of consumers, helping you understand what they need and how to appeal to them through digital content. Additionally, you’ll study how to compete in e-commerce markets, connect with clients through internet marketing tactics, and convert consumers into customers.
Frequently Asked Questions
Is business marketing a good major?
What is a business marketing degree called?
What degrees are best for marketing?
Do jobs in marketing pay well?
Featured Courses
BUSI 331 – Marketing Research
BUSI 436 – Digital Marketing in a Virtual World
BUSI 439 – Conversion and Optimization
BUSI 442 – Customer Retention through Digital Marketing
Highlights of Our Online BSBA – Digital Marketing Degree Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BSBA in Digital Marketing and Advertising degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our online undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn accreditation through the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP).
As a student in our online BSBA in Digital Marketing and Advertising program, you can access a wide variety of resources through Liberty’s research portal.
This BSBA serves as an excellent stepping stone toward earning a Master of Business Administration from Liberty.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/data-analytics/","Help Companies Make Data-Driven Decisions with a Bachelor’s Degree in Analytics and Business Administration
Are you interested in pairing technology and data analysis skills with your business career? Do you want to stand out and land a rewarding job in today’s technologically advanced marketplace? At Liberty, we have designed our 100% online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Data Analytics degree to help you do just that!
Becoming an industry leader in the ever-evolving field of data analytics requires a solid understanding of the power of data in informing high-quality decision-making. Our online data analytics classes can help equip you with a business degree that focuses on meeting the needs of today’s organizations.
Our program blends courses found in both a data analytics bachelor’s degree and a business administration degree to help prepare you for a successful career. In addition, our faculty teach from a biblical worldview to help fulfill our mission of Training Champions for Christ. An online bachelor’s degree in business analytics is a great next step to take toward pursuing a career in business or data science!
Partner with us and explore the evolving world of data and information while developing a strong foundation in the functional areas of business. Your interest in business administration and technology can be fused into a career you’ll love. Apply today and get the knowledge you need to pursue roles in business intelligence, data analysis, quality assurance, decision support, and more.
What is data analytics? How is it related to business?
Data analytics involves collecting data and making sense of it in order to understand what a company is doing well and where it needs to improve. For instance, an organization might analyze data from online sales and website traffic to figure out how to better connect with consumers digitally. Data analytics plays a critical role in business because it allows organizations to base their goals, strategies, and decisions on concrete, real-world factors and produce tangible results.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online BS in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Data Analytics Degree?
There is a growing need for business professionals to develop technological and analytical skills in order to compete in an increasingly data-driven marketplace. Analysts and managers alike are expected to think critically and make important decisions utilizing the vast amount of data available.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the demand for management analysts is expected to grow 14% from 2020 to 2030 – faster than the average for all occupations.* Management analysts play a vital role in helping organizations improve their efficiency. With a business and data analytics undergraduate degree from Liberty, you can become equipped to pursue tremendous job opportunities.
Our courses are taught by professors who have years of real-world experience. Additionally, Liberty is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) – so you can be confident that you are receiving a world-class education.
At Liberty, you don’t have to put your life on hold to finish your degree. Our BSBA – data analytics degree program is offered 100% online with 8-week courses and no set login times. That means you’ll have the flexibility you need to stay invested in your job, family, and community while taking the next step toward achieving your career goals.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Management Analysts (viewed online March 25, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
Frequently Asked Questions
How long does it take to complete a BSBA bachelor’s degree in analytics?
How will earning a bachelor’s in business administration impact my salary?
When can I start my bachelor’s degree in analytics and business administration?
Is an online data analytics degree respected?
What is the best degree to pursue after a BSBA?
What Will You Learn in Our Online Bachelor’s Degree in Business Administration – Data Analytics?
Our online BS in business administration – data analytics degree is designed to help you apply effective business practices in an ethical manner. This degree includes core business courses as well as specialized courses focusing on data analytics. The core classes provide well-rounded training in pivotal business topics such as accounting, business law, international business, and marketing principles.
Other topics of study in the core courses include:
Corporate finance
Financial statement analysis
Human resource management
Macroeconomics
Microeconomics
Organizational ethics
Principles of management
Strategic planning
Within the data analytics specialization, you can learn how to evaluate business environments and use data to help companies accomplish important objectives. You’ll also explore how to develop appropriate business strategies, policies, and solutions for sustainable competitive advantage.
Some of the major topics explored in this specialization include:
Business analytics, with an emphasis on descriptive-analytical techniques and theory
Collecting data and discovering data patterns
Extracting meaning from Structured Query Language and data modeling for decision-making
Methods of data collection and its impact and variation in a business setting
Prescriptive and predictive analytics
Real-world context analyses utilizing data sets and case studies
Selecting appropriate forecasting techniques
Time series and regression forecasting techniques
By combining your knowledge of effective business practices with practical methods for data analysis, you can help organizations of all sizes improve their decision-making processes.
Featured Courses
BUSI 333 – Business Analytics I
BUSI 341 – Database Concepts for Analytics
BUSI 405 – Forecasting and Predictive Analytics
BUSI 454 – Practical Analytics
Highlights of Our BSBA – Online Data Analytics Degree Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online analytics degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Find out how you can earn potential college credit and finish your degree faster with our Experience Plus program.
You’ll have access to a wide variety of resources through Liberty’s online library search portal while you pursue your BS in Business Administration with a data analytics concentration."
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/economics/","Residential Business Administration & Data Analysis – Economics Program
Perhaps more than any other science, economics is about how change influences the lives of individuals, businesses, and nations. The Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – Economics will cover both traditional micro and macro theory.
In macro, you will look at national and international fluctuations, monetary policies, the effects of the national debt, budget deficits, and the field of money and banking. In micro, you look at how firms operate, the functions of supply and demand, and various types of competition.
Academics: Economics Cognate
Featured Economic Business Courses
Modern Political and Economic Ideas (GOVT 302)
Money and the Financial System (BUSI 321)
Forecasting & Predictive Analytics (BUSI 405)
International Market Integration and Trade Agreements (BUSI 464)
Legal & Ethical Concepts for Decision Makers (BUSI 301)
Career Opportunities in Economics
Economist
Sales Analyst
Actuary"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/economics/","Prepare for Your Future with a Bachelor of Science in Economics and Business Administration Degree
Companies and organizations need to consider many factors when planning their operations and finances. They often need to look beyond internal affairs to understand the state of the economy as a whole. That way, they can decide how to handle their resources in a way that aligns with current economic trends and meets the needs of consumers.
Liberty University’s online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Economics is designed to equip future leaders with core business skills and an in-depth understanding of economics. In this program, you’ll receive vital training in accounting, finance, business strategy, economic forecasting, and international trade. Our top-notch curriculum provides a well-rounded look at the major challenges facing companies, giving you the insight needed to make smart business decisions in light of economic theory and current events.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Why pursue a bachelor’s in economics online degree?
If you’re seeking a degree that opens you up to many job opportunities in a fast-growing industry, then our economics program is for you. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average salary for economists is $105,020 per year. This field is projected to grow 14% from 2019 to 2029, which is much faster than the average for all other industries.* Earning a bachelor’s degree in economics can equip you for future success.
Should I study economics or finance?
Finance and economics are two fields that have much in common and often interact with each other. But they do have important differences that you’ll want to understand, so that you can pick the right degree to match your interests and career goals!
Economics is a broad field that analyzes how goods and services flow throughout an entire region or market. This degree can prepare you for a career in many industries, including business, government, and public policy. In contrast, finance is a subset of economics that focuses on money, banking, and investments within a particular company or industry. Finance majors tend to work mainly in the world of business.
Finance and economics degrees can both lead to exciting job opportunities, and Liberty offers both cognates within our BSBA program!
Why Choose Liberty University’s BS in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Economics Degree?
Are you worried that school will get in the way of your other commitments and priorities? We have just what you need. As pioneers in distance learning, we’re committed to offering a flexible education that works with your schedule. Our BSBA in Economics is 100% online and has no set login times — which means you can complete your coursework when and where it’s most convenient for you!
In this program, you’ll learn from seasoned professors who have years of experience in real-world business settings. Our faculty are passionate about what they do, well-versed in industry best practices, and able to provide expert training that can help jumpstart your career.
What sets Liberty apart from other schools that offer business administration programs? We won’t just help you get an education — we’ll equip you to make a difference in the world. To fulfill our mission of Training Champions for Christ, we’ve designed our curriculum to incorporate ethical training. That way, you can stand out as a leader of character and integrity in the workplace.
You can be confident that the skills and credentials gained in our ACBSP-accredited program will help increase your marketability and career readiness.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s Degree in Business and Economics?
In our online courses, you’ll gain the communication, research, and analysis skills needed to succeed as a leader in the business industry or government sector. The economics specialization provides targeted training that can diversify your skill set and increase your job opportunities.
Our core business courses explore important topics related to business administration, including business law, marketing, principles of management, corporate finance, organizational ethics, and human resource management. You’ll also analyze the various opportunities and challenges involved in planning business operations. With the knowledge gained in our program, you can help your organization streamline its processes, handle resources wisely, and find innovative ways to meet the needs of employees, clients, and consumers.
Our economics cognate dives into economic theory and real-world application. You’ll study macroeconomics and microeconomics, as well as how to collect data and forecast economic trends. That way, you can help your business make informed decisions and turn a profit.
This program also examines international financial systems and market integration among countries, so that you can effectively conduct business on a global scale. By learning about the prevailing political and economic theories of today, you can help your organization stay up-to-date with current trends and events.
Featured Courses
BUSI 321 – Money and the Financial System
BUSI 405 – Forecasting and Predictive Analytics
BUSI 464 – International Market Integration and Trade Agreements
GOVT 302 – Modern Political and Economic Ideas
Highlights of Liberty’s BSABA – Economics Degree Online
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BSBA in Economics degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our online undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University’s BSBA is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation, and having an ACBSP-accredited degree may give you a competitive advantage in the job market and help you stand out to employers.
You may be able to earn additional college credit for relevant life experience.
Our online economics classes are only 8 weeks long, with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
As an online Liberty student, you can access a wealth of resources through our top-notch research portal.
Through this program, you can network with business students and professionals from across the country.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Economists (viewed online October 16, 2020). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/entrepreneurship/","Residential Entrepreneurship Program
Build practical skills in opportunity identification, vision and team building, funding, and lean management through Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis: Entrepreneurship program. You will develop the behaviors and habits needed to create value through entrepreneurial and innovative ventures. Courses will prepare you to impact the world around you as you integrate faith with learning in a professional atmosphere.
The B.S. in Business Administration & Data Analysis serves as an excellent stepping stone toward earning either a Master of Business Administration or a Master of Arts in Executive Leadership, both offered online through Liberty.
The Business Administration: Entrepreneurship (B.S.) degree is also offered online
Academics: Entrepreneurship Cognate
Featured Entrepreneurship Courses
Introduction to Entrepreneurship (BUSI 336)
Developing Entrepreneurial Opportunities (BUSI 338)
Growth Enterprise: Strategy and Planning (BUSI 456)
Innovating into Industries and Markets (BUSI 458)
Human Resource Management (BUSI 342)
Career Opportunities for Entrepreneurship Graduates
Start-up founder
Business/Franchise owner
Intrapreneur"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/finance/","Residential Business Administration: Finance Program
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – Finance program will help you master financial skills critical for the business world. You will study financial analysis, investment strategy, the stock market, and banking skills that are necessary to work effectively in the financial industry.
You will develop skills pertinent to the fields of general business, accounting, economics, and marketing in both the domestic and international marketplace. Courses will prepare you to serve effectively as an expert in the modern business world, integrating faith with learning in a professional atmosphere.
Academics: Finance Cognate
Featured Finance Courses
Intermediate Accounting I (ACCT 301)
Financial Statement Analysis (ACCT 370)
Money and the Financial System (BUSI 321)
Forecasting & Predictive Analytics (BUSI 405)
Investments (BUSI 420)
Real Estate Finance and Investment (BUSI 422)
Career Opportunities in Finance
Advertising executive
Developer
Digital marketer
Promotions manager
Social marketer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/finance/","Invest in Your Future with Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Business Administration – Finance Degree
When businesses flourish, so does the economy. But managing a company’s finances can be tricky. How finances are handled can make or break a business. Organizations everywhere from for-profit to nonprofit need help making sure they are using their finances to maximize efficiency. They need someone with the knowledge base to examine financial statements, the analysis skills to identify problems, and the creativity to solve problems. 
With our Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Finance online degree, you can learn these skills and be able to help a business develop a strategy for success.
What you need to know as a finance student
What is the difference between finance and accounting?
What is business finance?
What will you make with a finance degree?
How long does it take to get a finance degree? 
Is a degree in finance worth it? 
Can you get a finance degree online? 
What jobs can you get with a BSBA – Finance degree?
A finance degree prepares you for a wealth of careers in the business world. Generally, jobs in finance fall into a few broad categories: corporate finance, commercial banking, investment banking, asset management, and personal financial planning. 
Find out more information about each career field below!
Asset Management
the Risk Taker
Commercial or Investment Banking
the Investor
Corporate Finance
the Budgeter
Financial Planning
the Planner
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Finance?
You’re looking for the best online finance degree program you can find. For you, this means rigorous academics and faculty with real-world experience, all of which will move you past book smarts and prepare you to successfully handle situations in the business world. This means an accredited program. This means a flexible format that allows you to maintain your current life and career while pursuing your goals. At Liberty, we make this a reality. 
Our business administration online bachelor’s degree program is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our program combines a core business administration curriculum with a finance cognate, so you won’t have to trade essential skills transferable to any business degree for the specialized knowledge you need to do well in the world of finance. 
Additionally, our professors have real-world experience in the business finance industry, allowing them to teach you practical skills you can use to reach your goals. And our online format allows you to complete your coursework on your own time so that you can pursue your degree while staying involved in your current career, family, and community.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
What Will You Learn in Our Online BS in Business Administration – Finance Degree Program?
Highlights of Our Online Bachelor’s in Business Administration – Finance Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BSBA in Finance degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty’s bachelor’s in business administration is ACBSP accredited. Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
Students can earn additional credit through life experience.
Students enrolled in our online bachelor’s in business administration – finance program can access a wide variety of resources through Liberty’s research portal.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/business-administration-data-analysis/financial-planning/","Residential Financial Planning Program
Financial Planners provide guidance and help others reach their goals of financial well-being. The Bachelor of Science in Business Administration & Data Analysis – Financial Planning degree is a CFP® Board-registered program and the core courses enable our graduates to complete the first major step to becoming a Certified Financial Planner.
This program provides a holistic view of the financial planning process and works to incorporate a Biblical worldview into the practice of Financial Planning. In addition to the required core classes on the degree completion plan, each student is required to complete various concentration classes that specialize in financial planning.
Academics: Financial Planning Cognate
Featured Financial Planning Courses
Individual Taxation (ACCT 401)
Financial Planning (BUSI 352)
Estate Planning (BUSI 354)
Investments (BUSI 420)
Insurance and Risk Management (BUSI 421)
Capstone in Financial Planning (BUSI 489)
Career Opportunities in Financial Planning
Certified Financial Planner (CFP)
Financial Advisor/Consultant
Banking
Insurance Advisor/Agent
Investment/Portfolio Manager
Personal Finance Teachers
Mortgage Banking
Development/Fund Raising
Employee Benefits
Pension and 401(k) Management
Become Qualified to Pursue Financial Planning Certifications
This program can help you meet the educational requirements needed to sit for the Certified Kingdom Advisor (CKA) and Certified Financial Planner (CFP) certification exams. Take a look below to see what each certification can do for you.
Certified Kingdom Advisor (CKA)
Do you want to work in Christian financial planning and help clients handle their financial affairs through the lens of biblical principles? If so, you may want to pursue a CKA certification. As a Christian organization, Liberty offers relevant financial training that can prepare you to sit for the CKA exam upon graduation. A CKA certification can show your future employers and clients that you are serving them from an ethical perspective.
Certified Financial Planner (CFP)
Earning the highly-respected CFP certification can help set you apart from other financial professionals and give your clients confidence in your skills. One question you may have is “Can I get my CFP without a degree?” While a full bachelor’s degree is not required, you can only take the CFP exam after completing certain academic prerequisites, which can be met through our online certificate in financial planning. With Liberty’s competitive tuition rates, our program can help keep your CFP certification costs down.
Want to Hear Insight Straight from Our Financial Planning Coaches?
Check out our featured blog and podcast!
Our Business Administration & Data Analysis: Financial Planning Program is a CFP Board registered program that satisfies the education coursework requirement to sit for the CFP exam."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/business-administration/entrepreneurship/","Take the First Step Toward Achieving Your Dreams with Liberty’s BS in Entrepreneurship
You have a spirit of innovation — dreaming up revolutionary ideas and figuring out how you can have an impact on your community and broaden your sphere of influence. You want to solve problems and improve the lives of others. You value the freedom and flexibility that comes from running your own business. You are a creator, an adventurer, a visionary. And now, you’re ready to take this passion and transform it into a career. All you need is a bachelor’s in entrepreneurship to help you get there.
In Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) and Data Analysis – Entrepreneurship, you can learn how to design, launch, and run a new business successfully. Our bachelor’s in business administration – entrepreneurship degree can equip you with critical business skills and the ability to lead with wisdom and integrity. With an administration degree, you can learn core management, finance, and marketing skills, and our entrepreneurship classes will help you strategize and implement a successful business plan. Choose a business administration – entrepreneurship degree that will give you the confidence to catapult your business forward!
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Our online entrepreneurship courses will not only show you how to start your own business but will also prepare you for career paths in business management and sales. With our business administration degree, you can cultivate the skills you need to enjoy the freedom and financial rewards of a thriving business venture. Pursue a BSBA in entrepreneurship online today to begin cultivating your dreams for tomorrow.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online BS in Business Administration and Data Analysis – Entrepreneurship Degree?
At Liberty University, our passion is your success — which is why our business administration degree in entrepreneurship is offered 100% online! With our online entrepreneurship degree, you can stay active in your job, your family, and your community without the worry of taking courses on campus. 
Because our mission is to Train Champions for Christ, we are dedicated to giving you the tools you need to achieve excellence in your field. Your business administration degree professors care about your goals and look forward to using their expertise to sharpen your entrepreneurial spirit. 
Whether you are looking to advance your current career or start your own business, Liberty University’s online BSBA in entrepreneurship degree will provide the biblical foundation and moral support you need to thrive.
What Will You Learn in Liberty’s BS in Business Administration – Entrepreneurship Degree Program?
In Liberty’s online business administration degree in entrepreneurship, you can learn the dynamics of establishing, funding, and managing a new enterprise. Our entrepreneurship courses will help you assess risks in order to avoid them and understand major aspects of business ownership such as franchising and e-commerce. The goal of our bachelor’s of business administration in entrepreneurship is to help you minimize risks and give you the best opportunity for success so that you can pursue your passion.
Featured Courses
BUSI 336 – Introduction to Entrepreneurship
BUSI 338 – Developing Entrepreneurial Opportunities
BUSI 411 – Operations Strategy
BUSI 458 – Innovating into Industries and Markets
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s Degree in Business Administration – Entrepreneurship 
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
This program is ACBSP accredited. Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
You will have access to the wide variety of materials available at Liberty University’s Jerry Falwell Library search portal while you pursue your BSBA – entrepreneurship degree. 
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/strategic-intelligence-studies/","Request Info Apply Now
Residential B.S. in Criminal Justice: Strategic Intelligence Studies Degree
The Bachelor of Science in Criminal Justice: Strategic Intelligence Studies helps you understand the demands of working in the intelligence community. You’ll graduate equipped to accurately analyze criminal patterns and work within the field of law enforcement or homeland security.
Our professors have years of experience in strategic intelligence and provide you with a practical understanding of intelligence gathering, terrorism, and counterterrorism.
Learn How To:
Evaluate intelligence
Analyze strategies for combating terrorism
Work within an intelligence agency
Academics: Strategic Intelligence Studies Cognate
Strategic Intelligence Studies Courses
Introduction to Intelligence and National Security (GOVT 380)
Intelligence Analysis (GOVT 381)
Counter-Terrorism (GOVT 481)
Military Intelligence (GOVT 483)
Strategic Intelligence (GOVT 484)
Law enforcement personnel who can document successful completion from an accredited police officer school in their state may earn up to 14 credit hours toward their degree. Military experience may also be evaluated for potential college credit.
Career Opportunities in Strategic Intelligence
Criminal Intelligence Analyst
Criminal Investigator
Police Officer
Special Agent
“Professors in the Helms School of Government share their personal and professional experiences about careers that you want to have. It is an awesome opportunity to learn from people who have actually served in the field.”
– Alexis Anderson, Strategic Intelligence"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/cultural-engagement/","Become Salt and Light in the World with an Online Bachelor’s Degree in Cultural Engagement
Today’s world is complex. Every day we are confronted with moral questions related to war, gender, politics, human rights, and more. There is a desperate need for Christian leaders who can humbly and ethically engage with these pressing issues and reach people with the truth of God’s Word.
Liberty’s 100% online B.S. in Cultural Engagement is designed to equip you for culture-related writing, reflection, and teaching roles within church, parachurch, and nonprofit settings. Ministry leaders and Christian nonprofit workers alike need to understand the relationship between our culture and the church. By exploring the unique issues facing modern society, you can become an effective leader, thinker, and communicator.
Are you ready to engage with some of life’s hardest questions and explore the implications of Scripture for our hurting world? If so, partner with us. Liberty’s online bachelor’s in cultural engagement can help you develop a solid foundation in biblical truth and the tools needed to communicate across cultural lines.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Cultural Engagement Degree?
At Liberty, we’ve designed our cultural engagement bachelor’s degree with your success in mind. We’re committed to helping you grow academically, professionally, and spiritually so you can serve as a Champion for Christ through your career.
Earn a degree that fits your schedule. Our online cultural engagement program is offered in a 100% online, 8-week course format. You’ll have the freedom to complete your degree from the comfort of your home without having to relocate or take time off from work! And you can stay invested in the things that really matter — like your family, church, and community — while pursuing your academic goals.
In our cultural engagement program, you’ll study under professors who have years of real-world experience. Our faculty are firmly rooted in the Christian faith and committed to helping you fulfill God’s calling on your life. At Liberty, you aren’t just another student — you are treated as a unique individual who can impact the world for Christ.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Cultural Engagement Degree Online?
In this program, you will analyze a 3-pronged approach to cultural engagement. In particular, you’ll explore 1) what the Bible teaches about humanity and culture, 2) cultural influences that have shaped our society, and 3) practical methods for communicating on a variety of cultural issues. You’ll then synthesize your knowledge by completing a capstone project, allowing you to strengthen your research and writing skills while preparing for future employment.
As a Christian university, Liberty seeks to promote biblical application across numerous fields. Throughout this program, you will dive into a variety of relevant disciplines, including global studies, apologetics, theology, and biblical studies. You’ll also analyze important cultural issues like human rights, education, politics, and competing worldviews. Our degree will help you navigate the culture around you so you can more effectively reach people with the Gospel.
Other topics of study include:
Biblical, theological, and practical foundations for contextualizing the Gospel in diverse cultural settings
Contemporary systems of cultural engagement and the historical roots of these systems
Key questions pertaining to theological anthropology and the doctrine of the Fall
Featured Courses
RLGN 210 – Introduction to Cultural Engagement
RLGN 410 – Contextualization and Cultural Development*
RLGN 480 – Cultural Engagement Capstone Seminar*
THEO 310 – Theology of Humanity
*Course guide coming soon
Highlights of Liberty’s Online Cultural Engagement Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
The courses in this program are only 8 weeks long with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
You can earn your bachelor’s in cultural engagement online in as little as 3.5 years!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/communication-and-the-arts/bachelors/digital-design/character-design/","Learn How to Design and Develop Characters for Books, Games, and More with a B.S. in Digital Design – Character Design!
Imagine creating a character that will be loved by children everywhere for years to come. What if you designed a character for a game that became a bestseller? Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Digital Design – Character Design can help prepare you for these sorts of accomplishments. Take your talent to new heights with skills in character design for films, games, children’s books, graphic novels, and more!
At Liberty, you can train to become a skilled graphic artist with knowledge of the latest methods used in studio and digital arts. You will study the latest techniques and technology for both 2D and 3D design and learn how your designs can affect culture and society. You can also gain essential skills in typography, vector illustration, and digital imaging. These wide-ranging skills can provide you with a solid foundation to begin your digital design career.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Character Designer Degree?
Pursuing a bachelor’s degree is a big investment, and here at Liberty, we want to make sure that you have the right degree for your goals. In our character designer program, we provide you the opportunity to gain useful graphic design skills that can enhance your ability to create memorable characters. Additionally, you can turn that knowledge into wisdom as you complete the practicum and undergraduate internship. 
What does a character designer do?
As a character designer, you are responsible for creating the look of characters for a variety of areas. You might design characters for children’s books, comic books, graphic novels, games, and more. Designing the costumes and clothes, poses, facial features, and expressions is all part of the development of characters. As part of your training at Liberty, you can learn how to compile a professional portfolio that demonstrates your skills as a character designer to increase your marketability.
As a character design major, you’ll have access to cutting-edge course content as well as the opportunity to complete a practicum and an internship in a graphic design setting. You’ll also study under faculty who have advanced degrees and years of experience in the digital design field. Their guidance can help strengthen your skills and give you the digital design techniques you need to further your career.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Character Design Degree Online?
As you begin your degree on how to become a character designer, you will first cover a broad range of topics to ensure that your education is well-rounded and balanced. You will study math and science as well as develop your writing and critical thinking skills in your general education classes.
Throughout this degree program, you’ll learn about the latest in art design as well as gain a historical perspective of art from the early ages up until the present. You will also study the interactions of technology, art, and culture throughout history and see how culture has changed because of these interactions. From the printing press to the iPhone, technology has affected art and will continue to do so into the future.
Another part of your studies will involve games and their effect on society. As technology has grown, the gaming industry has surpassed the film industry and needs individuals who can help shape the future for the better. You will gain invaluable knowledge regarding the latest in professional practices and learn how to best showcase your creative work as you enter the job force. At Liberty, we don’t just want you to get an education — we want to prepare you for your career, which is why all of our courses are taught from a Christian worldview and are centered on providing career skills.
Featured Courses
ARTS 114 – Introduction to 3D Design
ARTS 214 – Art, Culture, and Technology
ARTS 222 – Introduction to Graphic Design
ARTS 474 – Interactive Game Development
Highlights of Our Online Character Design Degree Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years ̶ and counting. 
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can experience a challenging and rewarding curriculum through graphic design online courses and have access to Adobe Creative Cloud products like Photoshop and InDesign.
The portfolio project in this degree can become an invaluable promotional tool to help you secure a job in the character and graphic design industry.
The on-the-job training you’ll receive in this degree program can help equip you to better market yourself, land interviews, and receive job offers.
Developing a professional network is also a positive outcome of earning a digital design online degree. By connecting with peers, alumni, and instructors, you will have a broad network of design professionals who can support and guide you.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/communication-and-the-arts/bachelors/digital-design/","Create, Inspire, and Stand Out with Liberty’s Digital Design Program Online 
For centuries, art has been a staple of the human experience. Painters, designers, architects, and writers have used their varying forms of art as an outlet to send messages they couldn’t otherwise articulate. Art can be more powerful than words, and it is very much alive and well today. While painters still paint and architects still sketch, the world of art has welcomed a new, dynamic addition: digital design.
Storytelling is the backbone of communication – it’s how we build friendships, forge connections, empathize with one another, and settle disagreements. Storytelling is also an integral part of business. Oftentimes, the company that tells the best stories is the company that experiences the most success. However, to relate to potential customers and tell effective stories, a company must understand its target audience.
Here’s a glimpse into the U.S.’s digital landscape:
About 85% of Americans own a smartphone – a 50% increase from 2011.*
Nearly 75% of U.S. residents own a computer.*
50% of Americans own a tablet.*
By partnering with Liberty for your digital design degree, you can learn how to create engaging content for this digital audience – driving sales, spreading messages, and telling visual stories. The skyrocketing popularity of digital platforms presents an incredible opportunity for college graduates, and Liberty’s digital design program can help you pursue in-demand digital design jobs.
*Pew Research Center at Mobile Fact Sheet (viewed online Sept. 22, 2021).
What is digital design?
Digital design is a form of visual communication that is specific to electronic devices like smartphones, computers, and tablets. Digital design pieces are typically interactive — meaning the user can physically touch the design and induce action or movement within the piece.
Why Choose Liberty’s Digital Media and Design Program Online?
As a pioneer in distance education since 1985, we understand what it takes to create a flexible, online degree program that can challenge you to grow and help prepare you for career success. Our digital design program was developed by a group of industry experts who have years of experience in design, strategic communication, and teaching. Your instructors are qualified, knowledgeable professionals whose expertise is preceded only by their commitment to your success.
In addition, our digital media and design program offers you the opportunity to gain real-world experience, which can help you stand out to hiring managers. This degree’s 90-hour practicum and 180-hour internship allow you to apply what you’ve learned in class to real-world settings. That way, you won’t just study digital design – you’ll put what you learn into practice, develop confidence in your abilities, and add to your résumé.
Today’s world is full of promise for aspiring digital designers. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, demand for web developers and digital designers is projected to grow 13% by 2030, which is faster than the average rate of job growth.* In addition, web developers and digital designers earned an average salary of $77,200 in 2020.* A digital design degree from Liberty could be your ticket to an in-demand, well-paying career.
Our digital design bachelor’s degree also offers multiple specializations, allowing you to gain a foundational understanding of digital design in addition to specialized knowledge in an area you’re most passionate about. Maybe you enjoy photography, or perhaps you’ve dabbled in graphic design before. Either way, our digital design program can teach you key digital principles and help you turn your passion into a rewarding, lifelong career.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Web Developers and Digital Designers (viewed online October 1, 2021). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
Digital design vs. graphic design
While digital design and graphic design are two very similar fields that often overlap, there is one major distinction between them. Graphic designers create noninteractive pieces while digital designers create pieces that users can interact with.
If you’re more interested in graphic design than digital design, we offer a Bachelor of Fine Arts in Graphic Design."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/criminal-justice/strategic-intelligence/","Prepare to Defend Your Country with a Bachelor’s in Strategic Intelligence Degree
You are passionate about justice. You are seeking an exciting career in a fast-paced field. You want to protect the innocent and make the world a safer place for everyone.
If that sounds like you, Liberty’s online B.S. in Criminal Justice – Strategic Intelligence Studies can help! Through this program, you can prepare to fight crime and terrorism at the local, national, or international level. You can also strengthen your analytical and investigative abilities as you explore how the criminal justice system works.
Partner with us and prepare to promote freedom, justice, and security in our nation.
What is strategic intelligence?
“Strategic intelligence” refers to information that is used to develop national policy and military strategy.
Why is strategic intelligence important?
Why pursue a strategic intelligence degree?
Why Choose Liberty University’s Strategic Intelligence Degree Online?
At Liberty, you won’t just get a degree — you can develop the knowledge, skills, and values essential for impacting the world. Our goal is to Train Champions for Christ. In keeping with this mission, we offer flexible courses, affordable tuition rates, and practical training that can help equip you for the real world. Most importantly, we’ll help you integrate biblical principles with professional knowledge so you can lead with excellence and integrity in your field.
Liberty’s strategic intelligence degree is available 100% online, and the classes have no set login times. That means you can complete your coursework whenever and wherever it’s most convenient for you — even from the comfort of your home! The best part? You won’t have to relocate or take time off from work to finish your degree!
In this program, you’ll study under professors who have years of experience working in criminal justice and strategic intelligence. With their guidance, you can develop marketable skills that could help set you apart from the competition. Our faculty are committed to helping you thrive in your academic, professional, and spiritual life.
By completing our bachelor’s degree in intelligence studies online, you could potentially launch a new career, boost your current job performance, or enter the workforce for the first time. We also offer many online master’s programs, should you later decide to further your education!
What Will You Learn in Our Online Intelligence Degree Program?
Learn how to protect freedom and carry out justice at the local, state, and federal level.
In this program, you’ll explore many aspects of criminal justice, such as juvenile justice, corrections, criminal law, criminal investigations, and the judicial process. You’ll also practice writing case briefings, formal reports, and memoranda.
Learn how to analyze trends and patterns in crime and promote criminal justice reform. Whether you want to work directly in the field or pursue administrative roles, Liberty University’s online criminal justice courses can help equip you to make a difference in your community.
Our strategic intelligence specialization provides an in-depth look at the field of intelligence, particularly as it functions within the framework of the Department of Homeland Security. You’ll explore the history of strategic intelligence as well as prominent trends in the field today.
Some of the topics you’ll study include how to gather and analyze intelligence, how to develop strategies for counterterrorism campaigns, and how to evaluate military intelligence. You’ll also analyze past intelligence and policy failures — such as the September 11 and Pearl Harbor attacks — so you and other intelligence professionals can learn from those mistakes and work toward a brighter future.
Earn your online degree in intelligence today and prepare to fight crime and terrorism in your community — and beyond.
Featured Courses
GOVT 380 – Introduction to Intelligence and National Security
GOVT 381 – Intelligence Analysis
GOVT 481 – Counter-Terrorism
GOVT 483 – Military Operations and Intelligence
Highlights of Liberty’s Strategic Intelligence Degree Program Online
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online strategic intelligence degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty is regionally accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
The courses in this program are only 8 weeks long with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
You can access a wealth of resources through our top-notch research portal while completing this strategic intelligence degree program online."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/communication-and-the-arts/bachelors/digital-design/photographic-design/","Capture and Preserve Life’s Important Moments with Liberty’s Digital Design Degree Online
Photography is much more than a hobby, something you do to fill scrapbooks, or a way to capture sunsets. Photography can be used to tell stories. Pictures encapsulate moments in time, document change, challenge beliefs, and inspire action by stirring emotions people may not realize they have. Photography epitomizes the youthful human spirit – free-willed and forward-looking yet nostalgic, distinctly poignant, and expressive of an unspoken yearning for something that is or once was.
Like any form of art, photography often requires training and practice to perfect it. That’s why Liberty University offers a 100% online Bachelor of Science in Digital Design – Photographic Design: to help you learn how to harness this power. Our bachelor’s degree in digital design – photographic design offers you invaluable resources and knowledge that you can use to take your career further.
Whether you hope to work for a marketing firm, become a freelance photographer, or pursue graduate studies, our digital design and photography classes online can help you achieve your professional goals. Don’t let the opportunity to earn a life-changing credential pass – partner with us, gain valuable knowledge, hone your skills, and become a standout storyteller with Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Digital Design – Photographic Design.
Why Choose Liberty’s Digital Media Degree Online – Photographic Design?
Our digital design degree online in photographic design can prepare you to experience and impact different cultures. Using state-of-the-art tools for industry-standard design and photography, this degree can teach you to create meaningful narratives and tell stories that capture the hearts and minds of audiences. In addition, this photographic design degree is taught by expert professors whose passion for design and photography is preceded only by their commitment to your success. 
This photography degree program also allows you to gain real-world experience through a practicum and an internship. Our online photography degree gives you the opportunity to gain marketable, real-world experience that can help set you apart in job candidate pools.
In addition, our digital design and photography classes online can help you pursue in-demand careers. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, demand for photographers is projected to grow 17% by 2030: a rate much faster than the national average for job growth.* Liberty’s BS in Digital Design – Photographic Design could be your ticket to success in an in-demand career field.
Capitalize on this promising industry trend. Apply today, earn a degree that you can use to pursue a rewarding job, and turn your passion for photography and digital design into a career you’ll love.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Photographers (viewed online Sept. 23, 2021). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Digital Media Online Degree in Photography?
At Liberty, we strive to develop well-rounded graduates who use what they learn to serve individual clients, large companies, and small businesses alike. In addition to offering a set of general education courses, our BS in Digital Design – Photographic Design degree consists of 2 sections: core digital design courses and photography-specific courses.
In the core courses, you will be introduced to 2D and 3D design. You’ll also study the history of art, 20th– and 21st-century art, and how art intersects with culture and technology. The core section of our online digital design degree is rounded out by an introduction to graphic design.
In the photographic design specialization, you will study typography, vector illustration, and digital imaging. You will also have the opportunity to gain a more in-depth knowledge of graphic design. In addition, the photography specialization covers digital photography, professional practices for photographers, principles of marketing, and the fundamentals of editing. You will also study digital promotion techniques and strategic communication.
As part of our mission to Train Champions for Christ, our online classes in photographic and digital design incorporate a biblical worldview. We don’t just view digital and photographic design as areas of study, we view them as callings — ways to celebrate God’s creation and His intelligent design. Earning your online photography degree from Liberty can help you become a principled leader who pursues standards of personal and professional excellence.
Featured Courses
ARTS 214 – Art, Culture, and Technology
ARTS 342 – Digital Imaging
ARTS 361 – Digital Photography
STCO 307 – Strategic Communication
Highlights of Our Digital Design – Online Photography Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online Bachelor of Science in Digital Design from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University is regionally accredited by SACSCOC, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges.
Our online photography degree is taught by a group of expert professors who have years of experience in digital design and photography."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/communication-and-the-arts/bachelors/digital-design/illustration-design/","Tell Stories That Inspire with Liberty’s Online Bachelor’s in Digital Design – Illustration Design Degree
Do you love the idea of using your artistic abilities to convey important ideas? With Liberty’s Bachelor of Science (BS) in Digital Design – Illustration Design, you can learn how to create illustrations for print and digital media. This program provides a strong foundation in areas like drawing, typography, vector illustration, and publication design. By earning your online illustration degree at Liberty, you can hone your design skills and become equipped to create art that informs and inspires.
From storybooks and cartoons to advertisements and video games, many forms of media use illustrations to communicate narratives, explain information, persuade consumers, increase visual appeal, and so much more! At Liberty, you can gain the specialized knowledge and hands-on training you need to pursue a career in this exciting field. Whether you enjoy creating physical art or using modern technology to develop engaging digital content, our illustration and digital design degree online can help you succeed.
Why Choose Liberty’s BS in Digital Design – Online Illustration Degree?
We know that, as you’re researching colleges with illustration majors, you need a school that prioritizes your academic and career success. That’s why Liberty’s illustration degree online provides a mix of virtual learning material and opportunities for you to gain real-world experience. In this program, you’ll study under seasoned faculty who have years of experience working in digital design and illustration. Under their guidance, you can gain an insider’s look at the industry and develop essential knowledge that can help give you a leg up in the professional world.
We’ve designed our online programs to meet the needs of full-time students and working professionals alike. The majority of our digital design and illustration courses are available in a 100% online, 8-week format with no set login times. That means you can stay invested in your family, job, and community while pursuing your academic goals!
At Liberty, you won’t have to sacrifice quality for flexibility. We are regionally accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) — so you can be confident that our programs have met rigorous academic standards and accreditation requirements.
Maybe you’re a digital design professional seeking new opportunities, or perhaps you’re hoping to enter this exciting field for the first time. You may even be looking to build your portfolio so you can highlight your best work and visually display your accomplishments for both job and graduate school applications. No matter what your goals are, we’re committed to helping you lead with excellence and integrity.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Digital Design and Illustration Classes?
In this illustration degree online, you’ll study important aspects of graphic design, art history, and 2D and 3D design. You’ll also examine the connection between art, culture, and technology. Ultimately, you can come to understand how art, design, and communication can be used to create meaningful narratives for a variety of audiences.
Within the illustration design specialization, you’ll explore a variety of traditional and digital art forms, including drawing, typography, vector illustration, publication design, and digital imaging. You’ll also take an in-depth look at graphic design techniques. In addition to completing online illustration classes, you’ll participate in a practicum and an internship — giving you the opportunity to boost your résumé and increase your marketability. Our professional practices course is designed to help you present your work and go through the job interview process as an artist — thus facilitating your move from the classroom to the workforce.
Upon completion of our online illustration courses, you can be better equipped to:
Apply typographic rules and measurements to composition
Create illustrations for both print and web using the functions and features of a professional drawing program
Follow the steps of the design process to develop conceptual ideas for illustration
Produce drawings that use technical and creative aspects to structure and articulate ideas
Utilize technical skills to proficiently create publications such as books, magazines, catalogs, and promotional materials
Featured Courses
ARTS 211 – Drawing I
ARTS 311 – Drawing II
ARTS 332 – Vector Illustration
ARTS 340 – Publication Design
Highlights of Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Illustration and Digital Design
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
In this program, you’ll complete a practicum, internship, and professional portfolio — giving you the chance to apply what you’ve learned in the classroom to the real world.
Our 100% online, 8-week courses give you the freedom to earn your degree on your schedule.
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC)."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/communication-and-the-arts/bachelors/digital-design/digital-merchandising-design/","Use Your Creativity to Connect with Consumers by Earning Liberty’s Online BS in Digital Design – Digital Merchandising Degree
With the growing use of computers, smartphones, and tablets, companies today recognize the value of using digital content to promote goods and services. If you want to use your creative skills to help your company reach its sales goals, Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Digital Design – Digital Merchandising Design degree may be for you! Our bachelor’s degree in merchandising can help you gain a strong foundation in graphic design, digital drafting, marketing, and promotions.
Maybe you’re a digital design professional looking to strengthen your skills, or perhaps you’re hoping to enter this exciting field for the first time. You may even be looking to build a portfolio so you can highlight your best work and visually display your accomplishments for both job and graduate school applications. No matter what your goals are, our merchandising degree can help you learn how to develop digital platforms that effectively influence customer intent and optimize user experience.
Are you ready to use your passion for design to help organizations increase their online customer base? If so, partner with us. We can help provide the academic knowledge and hands-on training you need to connect with consumers of all ages and generate sales growth.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Merchandising Degree Program?
At Liberty, we seek to Train Champions for Christ. In keeping with this mission, we’ve designed an online digital design degree that blends flexibility, affordability, and accessibility. The majority of our digital design and merchandising courses are available in a 100% online, 8-week format with no set login times. You’ll have the freedom to earn your degree on your schedule and easily access your course materials whenever you need them!
In addition to taking online classes, you will complete a practicum and an internship at an organization near you. That way, you can gain professional experience and hands-on training while still in school. Through this fieldwork, you’ll have the opportunity to apply your skills and knowledge in a real-world setting — allowing you to boost your résumé.
By choosing Liberty, you won’t have to sacrifice quality for flexibility. Liberty is regionally accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). You can pursue your online merchandising degree with confidence knowing that our programs have met rigorous academic standards and accreditation requirements. Partner with us and hone your skill set as you prepare to lead with integrity in your career!
What Will You Learn in Our Digital Design and Merchandising Classes Online?
In this digital design and merchandising degree program, you’ll study important aspects of 2D and 3D design, art history, and graphic design. You’ll also examine the connection between art, culture, and technology so you can learn how to better address the design challenges of modern e-commerce. Ultimately, you can come to understand how art, design, and communication can be used to create meaningful narratives for a variety of audiences.
Within the digital merchandising design specialization, you can learn how to promote products and services using engaging digital content. By understanding who your customers are and what they want, you can improve user experience, boost conversion rates, and help your company reach its sales goals. Our online merchandising courses take a deep dive into typography, vector illustration, digital imaging, and digital drafting.
You will also explore how to:
Design and implement merchandise promotions
Develop market segmentation strategies and manage assortment planning for a retail business
Evaluate aesthetics and create promotional artifacts
Manage factors such as pricing, cost analysis, profitability, and customer buying behaviors
Use marketing strategies to boost a company’s success and create satisfied customers
Lastly, you will put your skills to the test by completing a practicum and an internship. These opportunities can help you apply what you’ve learned to solve practical problems. You’ll gain valuable experience that could help you stand out to future employers by allowing you to hone industry-specific skills. We also offer a course in professional practices that can help you present your work and go through the job interview process as an artist — thus facilitating your move from the classroom to the workforce.
Featured Courses
BUSI 330 – Principles of Marketing
FACS 243 – Digital Drafting I
FACS 304 – Promotions and Aesthetics*
FACS 353 – Retail Merchandising
*Course guide coming soon
Highlights of Liberty’s Merchandising and Digital Design Degree Online
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
Throughout this digital design and merchandising degree program, you can network with industry professionals from across the country.
Graduate with a professional portfolio that can be used for employment and business opportunities."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/communication-and-the-arts/bachelors/digital-design/graphic-design/","Highlights of Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Digital Design – Graphic Design Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You may be eligible to earn additional college credit through relevant life experience.
The majority of our digital design courses are offered in an 8-week course format with 8 different start dates each year and no set login times.
Hone your skills and apply what you’ve learned with a culminating practicum and internship!
As a student in our online graphic design program, you can access a wide variety of online resources through Liberty’s research portal."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/communication-and-the-arts/bachelors/digital-design/visual-communication-design/","Develop Creative Strategies to Express Ideas with a BS in Digital Design – Visual Communication Degree
With a Bachelor of Science in Digital Design – Visual Communication Design, you can integrate business ideas with graphic design techniques and strategies in order to effectively reach target audiences. Whether you want to work for a marketing firm or are interested in digital media production, a visual communication degree could be for you!
At Liberty, our goal is to develop leaders within the field of digital design who are able to articulate ideas, data, and stories without using a lot of words. This degree can help you learn how to improve user experience on websites, bolster a company’s conversion rate, and produce artistic content for use in a variety of settings. 
Whether you are brand new to the field or looking to advance in your current career, we want to partner with you as you pursue a major in visual communication and design.
Why Choose Liberty’s Communication Design Bachelor’s Degree?
At Liberty University, we understand that life gets busy, which is why our visual communication degree is offered 100% online with no set login times. That way, you can remain invested in your family, career, and community – all while pursuing your degree. With this flexibility, you can earn your degree from the comfort of home.
As you’re looking for a visual communication design program, we know that educational quality is key. At Liberty, our professors have advanced degrees and years of experience in the field that they are eager to share with you. Additionally, Liberty University is regionally accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
What Will You Learn in Our Visual Communications Degree?
In this program, you will take foundational courses in English, math, science, and Christian thought to provide you with a well-rounded education. As you begin to take courses in your visual communications major, you’ll explore topics like media design, graphic design, digital photography, and the fundamentals of editing.
You’ll also study digital media and its applications as well as industry best practices. The culmination of your degree will be a practicum and internship, where you will be able to apply everything that you have learned in a real-world setting. Additionally, you’ll have free elective credits so you can mix and match various courses and further develop your visual communication skills.
Featured Online Visual Communication Design Courses
ARTS 342 – Digital Imaging
ARTS 477 – Interactive Design I 
DIGI 175 – Fundamentals of Editing
STCO 289 – Digital Promotion Technology and Application
Highlights of Our Bachelor of Science in Digital Design – Visual Communication Degree 
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You may be eligible to earn additional college credit through relevant life experience.
The majority of our digital design courses are offered in an 8-week course format with 8 different start dates each year and no set login times.
As a student in our online digital design program, you can access a wide variety of online resources through Liberty’s research portal.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/digital-media-journalism/","Communicate Truth with Your B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism 
Now more than ever, our world needs technically sound and ethical leaders who are prepared to use media to communicate truth. With a B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism, you’ll be ready to make an impact through your career.
Choose one of our many exciting concentrations below that match your career goals as a successful content creator. Learn from highly skilled professors who are grounded in their faith and share your passion for the industry. 
Here, you’ll build the skills needed to become a true leader in the field and a Champion for Christ.
Have questions about the department of Digital Media & Journalism or want to learn more?
Contact Janet Lenehan at jflenehan@liberty.edu or call (434) 582-2111
Start Your Journey in Digital Media & Journalism 
Discover Your Passion 
Customize your degree to fit your area of interest
Instagram
This error message is only visible to WordPress admins
Error: There is no connected account for the user libertyucinema."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/communication-and-the-arts/bachelors/digital-design/media-design/","Learn How to Creatively Contribute to Digital Media Platforms with Liberty’s BS in Digital Design – Media Design Degree
Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Digital Design – Media Design can help you combine effective design techniques with best practices in digital media and advertising. In this program, you’ll receive a mix of specialized industry knowledge and hands-on experience. The practicum and internship provide valuable opportunities for you to put your skills to the test in the professional workplace.
With this digital media design degree online, you won’t just learn how to use graphic design tools — you’ll also take strategic communication classes that can teach you how to work with digital promotion technologies, social media platforms, and more! By studying important aspects of art, communication, and digital media, you can gain a broad skill set — one that is well-suited to help meet organizational needs in the modern digital age.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Media and Design Program?
At Liberty, we seek to train up leaders of integrity who can serve with excellence in their field. That’s why we offer 100% online courses, a curriculum that is rooted in biblical truth, and expert instruction from industry professionals. With our BS in Digital Design – Media Design program, you can complete your coursework from the comfort of home — so you won’t have to put your life on hold to pursue your goals.
Maybe you’re a digital media design professional seeking new job opportunities, or perhaps you’re hoping to launch a career in this field for the first time. You may even be looking to build your portfolio so you can highlight your best work and visually display your accomplishments for both job and graduate school applications! No matter what your goals are, our media design degree can help you gain the knowledge, values, and skills you need to fulfill your unique calling.
Earn your degree in digital media design from a school committed to your success. Liberty is regionally accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC), so you can rest assured that our programs have met rigorous academic standards and accreditation requirements. By choosing Liberty, you won’t have to sacrifice quality for flexibility.
What Will You Learn as a Digital Media Design Major?
This digital design degree online was created to help you understand how art, design, and communication can be used to create meaningful narratives for a variety of audiences. Throughout the program, you’ll study essential aspects of 2D and 3D design, art history, and graphic design. You’ll also examine the connection between art, culture, and technology. By completing a practicum and an internship, you can gain hands-on experience that can help you stand out to employers.
Within the media design specialization, you’ll dive into typography, vector illustration, digital imaging, and interactive design. Additionally, you can learn about the tools used to create mobile and desktop web content. Our goal is to help you effectively engage your target audience — no matter the platform.
Some of the other topics you’ll study include:
Communication theories for social media marketing
Integrated marketing communication tools
Methods for advertising and branding an organization
Strategic uses of social media to promote organizational growth
Techniques for producing short-form interactive content as well as professional-grade audio and video messages
The role of advertising, image-making, public relations, and promotion in strategic social media
Featured Courses
ARTS 319 – Mobile and Interactive Technology Applications
STCO 289 – Digital Promotion Technologies and Application
STCO 346 – Persuasive Advertising and Storytelling
STCO 348 – Strategic Social Media
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s in Digital Design and Media Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Throughout this program, you’ll have the opportunity to network with digital media and design professionals from across the country.
You can earn your BS in Digital Design – Media Design degree in as little as 3.5 years!
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
Graduate with a professional portfolio that can be used for employment and business opportunities."
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/digital-media-journalism/audio-post-production/","Residential B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Audio – Post Production Degree
Sharpen your skills in the finishing steps of the audio process. Prepare for a career with a B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Audio – Post Production degree from Liberty University.
Become an artist with sound as you build on foundational audio skills to enhance the sound of a feature story, feature, documentary, or social media content to deliver product that reaches its strongest emotional and cultural impact.
Learn how to coordinate, mix, and edit various audio content for distribution formats like:
virtual reality
podcasting
radio and film sound design
This concentration also prepares you to sit for ProTools certification. Excellent on your resume, this certification will help to open doors in post-production houses and on-location work in the digital marketplace.
Gain experience while on campus with 90.9 The Light (WQLU), a Christian music station located right here on campus, and the university’s radio drama series, “Encounter.” Reaching a potential audience of 200,000 listeners with the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 90.9 The Light’s mission is to train the next generation of broadcasters including on-air commercial and spot production. Here you will learn more about the audio production process.
Student Media Lab
Housing more than a million dollars worth of equipment, the Student Media Lab is a crucial catalyst for hands-on learning in the Digital Media and Journalism department. Our students have access to industry-standard cameras, audio equipment, lighting gear, and other support equipment – all available for check-out. The student media lab also offers weekly training workshops for various featured equipment. Training is enhanced by the student media lab’s private editing suite that includes coloring stations and access to a variety of editing software.
Academics for the B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Audio – Post Production
Featured Audio – Post Production Courses
Pro Tools 1(CINE 271)
Pro Tools 2 (CINE 272)
Post Production Sound Design (DIGI 290)
Virtual Reality Design and Production (DIGI 327)
SFX, ADR, Foley (DIGI 490)
Start Your Career in Audio – Post Production
Audio – Post Production Career Opportunities
Sound engineer
Sound design
Dialogue editor
Dialogue assistant
Dialogue re-recording mixer
Sound effect editor
Sound effect assistant
Foley Mixer; (Foley Artist)
Supervising sound editor
Production mixer
Production recorder
Boom operator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/digital-media-journalism/audio-music-recording/","Residential B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Audio: Music Recording
Gain hands-on experience while preparing for a career in music recording and sound design as you pursue a B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Audio: Music Recording at Liberty University. Here, you’ll learn how to coordinate, mix, and edit audio and music scores for video and film.
Learn how to combine quality sound recording with skills in storytelling and broaden your career marketability.
Due to a partnership with the School of Music, you’ll gain a critical advantage in live music environments. Advance your audio skills in recording individual instruments as well as the collective sound of a band or ensemble.
Beyond the classroom, it’s also possible to gain experience with the university’s radio drama series, “The Encounter.”
Student Media Lab
Housing more than a million dollars worth of equipment, the Student Media Lab is a crucial catalyst for hands-on learning in the Digital Media and Journalism department. Our students have access to industry-standard cameras, audio equipment, lighting gear, and other support equipment – all available for check-out. The student media lab also offers weekly training workshops for various featured equipment. Training is enhanced by the student media lab’s private editing suite that includes coloring stations and access to a variety of editing software.
Academics for the B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Audio: Music Recording
Featured Audio: Music Recording Courses
Pro Tools 1 (CINE 271)
Fundamentals of Music Prod & Audio Engineering (MUSC 218)
Fundamentals of Sound Reinforcement (MUSC 329)
Studio Production, Mixing, & Audio Engineering (MUSC 362)
Start Your Career in Audio: Music Recording
Audio: Music Recording Career Opportunities
Radio announcer
Production manager
Sound engineer
Production director radio/TV
Church media manager
Foley artist
Utility sound technician
Acoustic consultant
Mastering engineer
Sound editor
ADR mixer
Sound design
Dialogue editor
Dialogue assistant
Dialogue re-recording mixer
Sound effect editor
Sound effect assistant
Supervising sound editor
Production mixer
Production recorder
Boom operator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/digital-media-journalism/audio-live-production/","Residential B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Audio: Live Production
Get ready for an exciting career in live sound capture and delivery with a B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism (B.S.) – Audio – Live Production from Liberty University.
Here, you’ll grow in your understanding of audio (sound capture, sound engineering, sound design, and sound mixing) in the live production process. Learn how to plan, coordinate, direct, and produce audio content or various live contexts, including radio, television, concerts, and online live streams.
Gain techniques in enhancing audience experience during live broadcast or live streamed events. And discover how to create a sound environment that will make the viewing audience feel as though they are there in person.
With the Audio – Live Production concentration, you’ll learn how to:
Design the technical set-up to capture audio for live indoor and outdoor events
Assess the sound environment
Adjust to capture quality sound for live and streamed distribution

Work with professors who are industry specialists and who are grounded in their Christian faith. Hands-on opportunities take place with the help of the School of Communication and Arts (SCA) Media Lab where you’ll have access to professional audio equipment. The SCA also houses the campus radio station facilities, 90.9 the Light, and a new audio lab where commercials, music, and package pre-production take place.
Build on your experience as you participate in live events streamed from the School of Music’s state of the art concert hall and the Vines auditorium. Coverage of athletic events in the Williams Stadium, the basketball and volleyball Liberty Arena, and the LaHaye Hockey Arena offer hands-on experience in live sound broadcast and streaming environments. Volunteers on the audio team for Campus Community and student workers on the Convocation crew also get firsthand exposure to front-of-house and mixing of live ministry and worship sound.
Student Media Lab
Housing more than a million dollars worth of equipment, the Student Media Lab is a crucial catalyst for hands-on learning in the Digital Media and Journalism department. Our students have access to industry-standard cameras, audio equipment, lighting gear, and other support equipment – all available for check-out. The student media lab also offers weekly training workshops for various featured equipment. Training is enhanced by the student media lab’s private editing suite that includes coloring stations and access to a variety of editing software.
Academics for the B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Audio: Live Production
Featured Audio: Live Production Courses
Pro Tools Fundamentals I (CINE 271)
Location Sound (DIGI 250)
Intermediate Audio Production (DIGI 334)
Sports Broadcasting (DIGI 340)
Live Sports Production (DIGI 451)
Advanced Audio Production (DIGI 474)
Start Your Career in Audio: Live Production
Audio: Live Production Career Opportunities
Front-of-House Audio Engineer
Live Sound Engineer
Mastering Engineer
Systems Engineer
Live Event Producer
Audio Production Technician
Production and Media Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/digital-media-journalism/church-media-production/","Residential B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Church Media Production 
Choose a career with purpose. Create impactful digital content for ministry. The B.S. in Digital Media and Journalism: Church Media Production degree gives you the skills, understanding, and training you’ll need to apply digital media techniques in the church environment.
Designed for those who want to work in a church or missions organization using digital media, journalism, or social media skills, this degree also gives you team-building skills for managing church ministry volunteers and para-professionals. It provides the necessary elements of successful ministry programming and will teach you how to apply the technical elements of digital media for the execution of effective and quality content.
Through our program, you’ll take core video and audio courses focusing on pre-production, production, and post-production stages. You will also gain a broad experience in team management, media theory, and practical skill application. Internship opportunities will also be available giving you hands-on experience that fosters collaboration and creativity.
Learn from industry-savvy professors who will show you how to present the gospel in unique and successful ways and to provide entertainment for Bible-believing congregations.
Student Media Lab
Housing more than a million dollars worth of equipment, the Student Media Lab is a crucial catalyst for hands-on learning in the Digital Media and Journalism department. Our students have access to industry-standard cameras, audio equipment, lighting gear, and other support equipment – all available for check-out. The student media lab also offers weekly training workshops for various featured equipment. Training is enhanced by the student media lab’s private editing suite that includes coloring stations and access to a variety of editing software.
Academics for the B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Church Media Production
Featured Church Media Production Courses
Introduction to Church Ministries (CHMN 201)
Church Ministry Practicum 1 (CHMN 205)
Foundations in Ministry Programming (CHMN 360)
Intermediate Editing & Effects (DIGI 282)
Intermediate Audio Production (DIGI 334)
Advanced Audio Production (DIGI 474)
Advanced Video Production (DIGI 483)
Start Your Career in Church Media Production
Church Media Production Career Opportunities
Church media director
Youth Leader
Youth Pastor"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/digital-media-journalism/digital-journalism/","Residential B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Digital Journalism Degree
Create positive change as you effectively communicate truth with a B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Digital Journalism Degree from Liberty University.
With this degree, you’ll focus on your writing and research skills learning story development, and the production of hard and soft news for multiple media platforms and distribution outlets.
Gain a professional understanding of:
Proper script format for radio, television, and streaming news coverage
Fact-checking
The difference between editorial vs. news content
The connection and reciprocal relationship between print and video news stories
Pursue truth as you develop story ideas, gather information from sources, and accurately communicate with your audience. Here, you’ll also learn the value of developing relationships with content authorities for honest reporting as well as timely information delivery.
Beyond the classroom, you can gain experience right here on campus with 90.9 The Light (WQLU), a Christian music station featuring regular newscasts and news talk formats. You will also have the opportunity to write and produce content for the Liberty Champion, one of the largest weekly community newspapers in Central Virginia. And, deliver and produce news content in two of our state-of-the-art television studios or contribute to the Liberty Flames Sports Network (LFSN).
Student Media Lab
Housing more than a million dollars worth of equipment, the Student Media Lab is a crucial catalyst for hands-on learning in the Digital Media and Journalism department. Our students have access to industry-standard cameras, audio equipment, lighting gear, and other support equipment – all available for check-out. The student media lab also offers weekly training workshops for various featured equipment. Training is enhanced by the student media lab’s private editing suite that includes coloring stations and access to a variety of editing software.
Academics for the B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Digital Journalism
Featured Digital Journalism Courses
TV & Digital Reporting/Production (DIGI 343)
Producing Digital News (JOUR 345)
News Writing & Reporting II (JOUR 354)
Digital Magazine Writing & Editing (JOUR 374)
Investigative Reporting (JOUR 485)
Intro to Documentary Filmmaking (CINE 260)
Documentary Photography/ Photojournalism (ARTS 365)
Start Your Career in Digital Journalism
Digital Journalism Career Opportunities
Radio News Reporter
TV News Reporter
Beat Reporter
Radio News Anchor/Host
TV News Anchor/Host
News Director
Assignment Editor
Multimedia Journalist
Documentary Production
Social Media Writer
Social Media Editor
Multimedia Packaging for Web/Mobile
Copy Editor
Communications Coordinator
Public Information Officer
Promotional Writing/Packaging"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/digital-media-journalism/sports-journalism/","Residential B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Sports Journalism Degree
Develop the skills you need for an exciting career in sports journalism through a variety of platforms like broadcast, social media, and online and print writing. With a B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Sports Journalism from Liberty University, you’ll learn how to pursue truth as you develop story ideas, gather information from sources, and accurately communicate to your audiences.
Gain investigative techniques required to cover sports issues and personal stories of athletes in a wide variety of sports. Learn how to approach professional and para-professional athletes respectfully and in such a way as to get the stories that sports fans want to hear and know.
Learn from industry-savvy professors who are grounded in their Christian faith. You can also apply your skills and foster industry relationships through internship opportunities.
Beyond the classroom, you can gain experience right here on campus with the Liberty Flames Sports Network (LFSN) as it produces multiple sportscasts of Liberty athletics each week. You will also have the opportunity to contribute to 90.9 The Light (WQLU), a Christian music station that features sportscasts of local games. You can also write and produce content for one of the largest weekly community newspapers in Central Virginia, the Liberty Champion. The Champion’s content is distributed in both print and online formats. Additionally, you will have the opportunity to deliver and produce sports content in two state-of-the-art television studios and control rooms.
Student Media Lab
Housing more than a million dollars worth of equipment, the Student Media Lab is a crucial catalyst for hands-on learning in the Digital Media and Journalism department. Our students have access to industry-standard cameras, audio equipment, lighting gear, and other support equipment – all available for check-out. The student media lab also offers weekly training workshops for various featured equipment. Training is enhanced by the student media lab’s private editing suite that includes coloring stations and access to a variety of editing software.
Academics for the B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Sports Journalism
Featured Sports Journalism Courses
Sports Broadcasting (DIGI 340)
TV & Digital Reporting/Production (DIGI 343)
Producing Digital News (JOUR 345)
News Writing & Reporting II (JOUR 354)
Digital Magazine Writing & Ed (JOUR 374)
Intro to Documentary Filmmaking (CINE 260) or
Live Sports Production (DIGI 451)
Start Your Career in Sports Journalism
Sports Journalism Career Opportunities
Radio sports reporter
Tv sports reporter
Sports writer
Radio sports
Talk host
Radio sports update anchor
Tv sports anchor/host
Play-by-play broadcaster
Color commentary
Sideline reporter
Sports director
Sports information director
Documentary production
Social media writer
Social media editor
Multimedia packaging for web/mobile
Promotional writing/packaging"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/digital-media-journalism/video-production/","Residential B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Video Production Degree
Enhance your ability to compete in the digital media industry with a B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Video Production degree from Liberty University. Sharpen your skills in video production and prepare for a professional career in local market broadcast and streaming as well as the national television, digital media, and streaming production market.
Here, you’ll get a dynamic mix of lighting, sound, and editing techniques which are the basics of the video producer, director, or production crew member’s toolbox.
Courses in this concentration cover some aspect requirements for AVID user or instructor status. AVID certification is a key indicator of the video professional’s grasp of industry-standard tools.
Student Media Lab
Housing more than a million dollars worth of equipment, the Student Media Lab is a crucial catalyst for hands-on learning in the Digital Media and Journalism department. Our students have access to industry-standard cameras, audio equipment, lighting gear, and other support equipment – all available for check-out. The student media lab also offers weekly training workshops for various featured equipment. Training is enhanced by the student media lab’s private editing suite that includes coloring stations and access to a variety of editing software.
Academics for the B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Video Production
Featured Video Production Courses
Lighting and Cinematography (DIGI 222)
Intermediate Editing & Effects (DIGI 282)
Virtual Reality & Production (DIGI 327)
Intermediate Audio Production (DIGI 334)
TV and Digital Reporting and Production (DIGI 343)
Advanced Video Production (DIGI 483)
Start Your Career in Video Production
Video Production Career Opportunities
Producer
Director
Videographer
Production Manager
Camera person/Videographer
Lighting director/designer
Features/News producer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/digital-media-journalism/entertainment-journalism/","Residential B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Entertainment Journalism
Develop the storytelling and technical skills you need for a successful career in the entertainment journalism industry. With your B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Entertainment Journalism degree from Liberty University, you’ll learn how to pursue truth as you develop story ideas, gather information from your sources, and accurately communicate it to your audience.
Learn from industry-savvy professors who are grounded in their Christian faith. You can also apply your skills and foster industry relationships through internship opportunities.
Beyond the classroom, you can gain experience right here on campus with 90.9 The Light (WQLU), a Christian music station featuring regular newscasts and news talk formats. You will also have the opportunity to write and produce content for the Liberty Champion, one of the largest weekly community newspapers in Central Virginia. And, deliver and produce news content in two of our state-of-the-art television studios or contribute to the Liberty Flames Sports Network (LFSN).
Student Media Lab
Housing more than a million dollars worth of equipment, the Student Media Lab is a crucial catalyst for hands-on learning in the Digital Media and Journalism department. Our students have access to industry-standard cameras, audio equipment, lighting gear, and other support equipment – all available for check-out. The student media lab also offers weekly training workshops for various featured equipment. Training is enhanced by the student media lab’s private editing suite that includes coloring stations and access to a variety of editing software.
Academics for the B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Entertainment Journalism
Featured Entertainment Journalism Courses
Intro to Family and Consumer Science (FACS 103)
Introduction to the Fashion Industry (FACS 225)
E-News Reporting (JOUR 357)
Writing & Edit Digi Mag. & Features (JOUR 374) or
Intro to Documentary Filmmaking (CINE 260)
Start Your Career in Entertainment Journalism
Entertainment Journalism Career Opportunities
eMagazine writer/reporter
Entertainment show host.
Writer/producer for talk shows
Guest producer for talk shows
Radio Reporter
TV Reporter
Beat Reporter
Radio Host
Radio Host
TV Host
Documentary Production
Social Media Writer
Social Media Editor
Multimedia Packaging for Web/Mobile
Communications Coordinator
Promotional Writing/Packaging"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/digital-media-journalism/video-editing/","Residential B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Video Editing Degree
Get the skills you need for a successful video editing career with a B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Video Editing degree from Liberty University. Study the art and skill of video editing including the use of images in storytelling, the techniques of effective presentation, and the advances in editing software that will keep you up to speed in the marketplace
With this degree, you’ll learn:
Software in the Adobe Creative Suite and AVID Media Composer (with possible AVID certification)
Professional technical standards required for broadcast, streaming, and international distribution
Editing in the industry of virtual reality
The B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Video Editing degree is foundational to the profession regardless of which type of editing you want to do. This degree concentration prepares you to work on a show for broadcast, for places like Netflix, Amazon, HULU, or STARZ original programming, or for independent producers of documentary, episodic or standalone programming. It also prepares you to work in local stations or to create your own post-production business.
Student Media Lab
Housing more than a million dollars worth of equipment, the Student Media Lab is a crucial catalyst for hands-on learning in the Digital Media and Journalism department. Our students have access to industry-standard cameras, audio equipment, lighting gear, and other support equipment – all available for check-out. The student media lab also offers weekly training workshops for various featured equipment. Training is enhanced by the student media lab’s private editing suite that includes coloring stations and access to a variety of editing software.
Academics for the B.S. in Digital Media & Journalism: Video Editing
Featured Video Editing Courses
Intermediate Editing and Effects (DIGI 282)
Sound Design (DIGI 290)
Virtual Reality Design and Production (DIGI 348)
Advanced Editing Techniques 1(CJUS 423)
Editing Theory (DIGI 350)
Advanced Editing Techniques 2 (DIGI 485)
Start Your Career in Video Editing
Video Editing Career Opportunities
Editor – Freelance or staff
Assistant Editor – Freelance or staff
GFX designer/finisher
Post Production facility owner/manager or lead editor"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/elementary-education/","Residential B.Ed. in Elementary Education (Pre K-6) – Licensure
Engage and inspire young learners in a successful career as a teacher. With the B.Ed. in Elementary Education from Liberty University, you’ll not only gain the licensure you need to teach, but you’ll get to enter a career where you can make a positive impact on young minds.
Learn from experienced faculty who are committed to providing quality education based on the principles of God’s Word. Develop a biblical worldview along with the type of leadership skills you’ll need in the classroom.
The B.Ed. in Elementary Education degree is designed for students who do not have an initial teaching license. In our program, you’ll gain a deep understanding of instructional content for all types of learners. Here, you’ll get what you need to effectively assess, plan, and teach elementary students.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
See the online B.Ed. in Elementary Education degree
Career Information
A teaching license is required for many careers in the field of education. This degree leads to initial licensure in the state of Virginia. Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity. The Bachelor of Education degree will prepare you for a teaching career through studies of child development and cognitive processes. You will also explore research-based pedagogical approaches and instructional strategies."
"https://www.liberty.edu/engineering/bachelors/electrical-engineering-bsee/","Residential Electrical Engineering Degree
Challenge yourself with a degree that gives you the skills you’ll need for a successful career in Electrical Engineering.
Gain both critical and systematic thinking capabilities through the B.S. in Electrical Engineering from Liberty University. Here, you’ll not only learn how to build physical, working devices and systems, but also how to design complex systems through an abstraction and system approach.
At Liberty, experienced Christian professors use an interactive approach in teaching students through small class settings. Our primary goal is to develop Christ-centered men and women with the values, knowledge, and skills necessary to positively influence electrical engineering related industries.
Products and services provided through electrical engineering have had a profound impact on our society – from electrical power systems to computers and communication systems such as the internet and smartphones. As our society moves towards closer integration between the cyber and physical realms, electrical engineers will help to improve the quality of life through the design and building of systems and infrastructure.
Accreditation
The Electrical Engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission(s) of ABET, under the General Criteria and the Program Criteria for Electrical and Similarly Named Engineering Programs.
Featured Electrical Engineering Courses
AC Circuit Analysis (ENGE 212)
Digital Signal Processing (ENGE 312)
Electromagnetic Fields (ENGE 331)
Communication Systems (ENGE 341)
Career Outlook*
Median Pay: $101,780/year, $48.93/hour
Number of Jobs: 303,800
*2021 stats from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
Career Opportunities as an Electrical Engineer
Specialize in communications systems, signal processing, analog circuit design, and more
Work in government agencies such as USPTO (US Patent and Trademark Office), FCC (Federal Communication Bureaus), and more
Work in national research agencies or labs such as NASA and DoE labs, or DoD labs such as ONR (Office of Naval Research)
Work in developing countries as a member of a missionary organization
Develop wind, solar, and existing thermal and nuclear energy systems
Design controls and communications systems to help doctors perform surgery with smarter robots
Enhance image processing and make better instruments to help diagnose and treat diseases
Develop nanotechnologies to help scientists study microorganisms
Where Students Have Interned
Intel
Adaptrum
Framatome
Flowserve
FBI
NASA
Rockwell Collins
NIH (National Institutes of Health)
Where Alumni Have Worked
Northrop Grumann
Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory
Proctor & Gamble
Newport News Shipbuilding – designer and builder of U.S. aircraft carrier
Ph.D. student as a graduate research assistant with full scholarship at the University of Virginia"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/elementary-education/middle-grades-english/","Residential Degree in Elementary Education: Middle Grades English – Licensure
Enhance your opportunities as an educator with the B.Ed. in Elementary Education: Middle Grades English from Liberty University. Here, you’ll not only gain the licensure you need to teach, but you’ll learn how to help children from diverse cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds achieve their educational best.
The B.Ed in Elementary Education: Middle Grades English degree will give you two endorsements: one in elementary education and the other in middle grades English 6-8. This attractive program makes you eligible for a Virginia state teaching license in two areas. To obtain a license in another state, follow reciprocity guidelines established by that state’s Department of Education.
Enjoy in-person classroom study with experienced faculty who are committed to providing quality education based on the principles of God’s Word. Develop a biblical worldview along with the type of leadership skills you’ll need in the classroom.
Students selecting and completing this cognate will have the opportunity to complete several content-specific courses in English. These courses will include expository writing and modern grammar.
Learn more about the B.Ed. in Elementary Education
Get more info on all the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
See the online B.Ed. in Elementary Education: Middle Grades English degree
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Courses
Introduction to Education and Classroom Technologies (EDUC 201)
World Literature I (ENGL 221)
Teaching Reading to Diverse Learners (EDUC 318)
Modern Grammar (ENGL 333)
Elementary School Curriculum (EDUC 410)
Career Opportunities in Elementary Education
A teaching license is required for many careers in the field of education. This degree leads to initial licensure in the state of Virginia. Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity. The Bachelor of Education degree will prepare you for a teaching career through studies of child development and cognitive processes. You will also explore research-based pedagogical approaches and instructional strategies. Course work will require you to complete projects and lesson plan that focus on English content. You will then complete the degree with a semester of student teaching that will acclimate you to the role of being a teacher."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/early-childhood-education/","Impact the Next Generation with Liberty’s Non-Licensure BS in Early Childhood Education Interdisciplinary Studies Degree
A lot happens in a child’s development both before and during their early years of elementary school. With new concepts constantly being introduced to them, children under the age of 8 have a lot of growing to do! You can have a hand in providing the love, support, and encouragement these young ones need to embrace learning and get the best start they can.
Giving children a solid foundation for their academic journey can lead to better lives and opportunities for them down the road. The young students you work with today could be tomorrow’s world changers. By earning an early childhood education degree online, you can learn how to transform the lives of the children in your care.
Liberty’s Bachelor of Science (BS) in Early Childhood Education Interdisciplinary Studies is an excellent option if you want to work in Christian school, private school, or homeschool settings or in childcare facilities and churches. You could also pursue a career as a paraprofessional educator in a public school. If you decide later on down the road to pursue licensure, this early childhood education online degree can provide a solid foundation for pursuing a licensure-track Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT).
The Need for Early Childhood Professionals Is Growing
Your dream to work with children can be used to fill the need for talented early childhood experts in our education system. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the demand for preschool teachers is expected to grow 18% from 2020 to 2030* – and the demand for kindergarten and elementary school teachers is projected to grow 7% during that same time frame.** Liberty’s early childhood bachelor’s degree online can help provide the training you need to care for and teach students up to 8 years old (typically pre-K through 3rd grade).
With more students funneling through our schools, there is an inevitable need for teachers. There is also increasing demand for childcare workers in general, with the BLS projecting 8% job growth for this profession from 2020 to 2030.*** By completing an online degree in early childhood education, you won’t just be equipped to work in schools – you can also pursue jobs in daycares, child development centers, and other settings where you may work with young children.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Preschool Teachers (viewed online Feb. 22, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
Please note: Liberty’s BS in Early Childhood Education Interdisciplinary Studies is a non-licensure degree. This program is designed to prepare students for non-licensed teaching/education roles and to offer a solid foundation for pursuing a licensure program at a later time. If you are interested in teaching licensure at the bachelor’s level, please see our Bachelor of Education program.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Bachelor’s Degree in Early Childhood Education Interdisciplinary Studies?
If going for your bachelor’s degree seems overwhelming, or you’re wondering how long it takes to earn a degree in early childhood education, let us help. Our 100% online bachelor’s degree in early childhood education can be completed in as little as 3.5 years. With 8 start dates per year and no set login times, you’ll have the freedom to complete your early childhood education online bachelor’s degree on your schedule.
Find out what else sets us apart:
Credibility | Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). Our programs have met rigorous academic standards and accreditation requirements, so you can be confident that you’re receiving an education of the highest quality.
Experienced Faculty | Our bachelor’s degree in early childhood education online is taught by seasoned faculty who care about your success. Drawing on their years of real-world experience, they can help equip you to lead with excellence and integrity in the field of education. Their encouragement can help fuel your heart for teaching, reminding you how important your work is for eternity.
Hands-On Training | In addition to offering award-winning academics and industry-leading faculty, we’ve designed our degrees to give you as many opportunities as possible to grow and learn practical skills. Our online early childhood education bachelor’s degree includes an optional field experience course that can be completed at an approved location near you. This course can help give you an additional confidence boost as you apply your studies to a live classroom setting.
Frequently Asked Questions
What jobs can you get with a non-licensure bachelor of early childhood education online?
Can you earn an early childhood education degree online?
Can you teach elementary school with a degree in early childhood education?
What is the benefit of earning a non-licensure early childhood education degree?
What do you study in an online early childhood education degree?
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Early Childhood Education Online Program?
Liberty’s bachelor’s degree in early childhood education focuses on current issues and trends in education. You can also learn about the elements of instruction and the important psychological milestones of early childhood development. We know that you are passionate about teaching children – so are we! Let us help you discover the best instructional strategies for both you and your students.
At Liberty, you can earn a degree focused on child development as well as education theories and practices. This can help you better tailor an educational experience to the specific needs of your young students.
Some of the topics you’ll study in this early childhood bachelor’s degree include:
Approaches to teaching reading, including phonics, vocabulary, comprehension, fluency, and language development
Basic theories and principles of child growth and development
Best practices for teaching mathematics
How family relationships, development, and content knowledge affect early childhood education
How to develop a personal philosophy and apply it to teaching, lesson plan design, and delivery
Learning theories and styles
Methods for classroom management
The promotion of wellness in early childhood education through good nutrition and safety for young children
We know that lectures and online assignments can only teach you so much – hands-on experience is important as well. That’s why our online bachelor’s in early childhood education degree includes an optional field experience capstone course, which can help you put your skills to the test in a live classroom.
Featured Courses
EDUC 210 – Early Childhood Education Fundamentals
EDUC 215 – Wellness in the Early Childhood Setting
PSYC 210 – Developmental Psychology
PSYC 221 – Psychology of Childhood
Highlights of Liberty’s Online Early Childhood Bachelor’s Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online early childhood education degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can transfer in up to 75% of your total credits to Liberty’s online bachelor’s in early childhood education.
Gain hands-on experience with an education practicum. 
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/elementary-education/","Prepare Children for the Future with Liberty’s Online Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Elementary Education Degree
To be successful adults, children need a firm foundation of primary education, emotional support, and good leadership. Investing in their futures is one of the most fulfilling roles you can take on as an educator. Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Education in Elementary Education will give you the tools you need to help children succeed in their educational journey. This degree can prepare you to apply best practices and theories that can help your students grow and thrive.
Liberty’s B.Ed. in Elementary Education is one of only a few like it in the U.S. — and is the only 100% online bachelor’s degree that leads to teacher licensure in Virginia. Through this program, you will complete the core competencies, student teaching, and practicum requirements necessary to earn your Virginia teaching license.
Partner with Liberty and be classroom-ready immediately upon graduation! Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). Once you complete Virginia licensure requirements, you can apply for reciprocity in another state.
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Elementary Education B.Ed. Degree?
Liberty’s unique licensure-track elementary education program provides 100% online courses that are VDOE approved. With hands-on experience through student teaching and practicums in a classroom near you, you can learn to apply teaching theory to real-world problems.
At Liberty University, our mission is to Train Champions for Christ, so you’ll study under dedicated professors who teach from a biblical worldview and are passionate about building up teachers who pursue excellence and Christ-like compassion. They have years of real-world elementary school experience and will help you learn how to seamlessly integrate your faith into your profession. 
Designed to provide maximum flexibility and convenience in a 100% online format, our bachelor’s degree in elementary education can give you the foundation you need to thrive as a teacher — without ever having to travel to a university campus.
What Will You Learn in Our Online B.Ed. in Elementary Education Degree Program?
Liberty University’s online teaching degree in elementary education will give you a thorough background in educational theories and tools you will need to create a safe, creative, and fun learning environment. You can learn how to help children from diverse cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds achieve their educational best. Overall, Liberty’s online elementary teaching licensure degree is designed to prepare teachers with the practical, ethical, and legal understanding to ensure they can meet the challenges of today’s teaching environments.
While completing Liberty’s online elementary education degree, you will study critical learning theories and create portfolios and curricula that will demonstrate your expertise to future employers. Your practicum and student teaching hours are required to meet licensure requirements, but they also allow you to apply your skills in a hands-on teaching environment specific to your desired field.
Elementary Education Featured Courses
EDUC 225 – Instructional Design for Elementary and Middle Classrooms
EDUC 318 – Teaching Reading to Diverse Learners
EDUC 350 – Behavioral and Individual Differences
EDUC 410 – Elementary School Curriculum
General
Middle Grades English
Middle Grades Mathematics
Middle Grades Science
Middle Grades Social Science
Special Education
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/elementary-education/middle-grades-mathematics/","Residential Degree in Elementary Education: Middle Grades Mathematics – Licensure
Expand your teaching career opportunities with the B.Ed. in Elementary Education: Middle Grades Mathematics from Liberty University. Here, you’ll not only gain the licensure you need to teach, but you’ll learn how to help children from diverse cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds achieve their educational best.
The B.Ed. in Elementary Education: Middle Grades Mathematics offers you two endorsements: one in elementary education and the other in middle grades mathematics 6-8. 
This attractive program makes you eligible for a Virginia state teaching license in two areas. To obtain a license in another state, follow reciprocity guidelines established by that state’s Department of Education.
Enjoy in-person classroom study with experienced faculty who are committed to providing quality education based on the principles of God’s Word. Develop a biblical worldview along with the type of leadership skills you’ll need in the classroom.
Students selecting and completing this cognate will have the opportunity to complete several content-specific courses in mathematics. These courses will include discrete mathematics, probability and statistics, and mathematical reasoning.
Learn more about the B.Ed. in Elementary Education
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
See the online B.Ed. in Elementary Education: Middle Grades Mathematics degree
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Courses
Elementary Functions and Coordinate Geometry (MATH 128)
Introduction to Education and Classroom Technologies (EDUC 201)
Teaching Elementary and Middle School Mathematics (EDU 323)
Elementary School Curriculum (EDUC 410)
Middle School Curriculum and Instruction (EDUC 412)
Career Opportunities in Elementary Education
A teaching license is required for many careers in the field of education. This degree leads to initial licensure in the state of Virginia. Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity. The Bachelor of Education degree will prepare you for a teaching career through studies of child development and cognitive processes. You will also explore research-based pedagogical approaches and instructional strategies. Course work will require you to complete projects and lesson plan that focus on math content. You will then complete the degree with a semester of student teaching that will acclimate you to the role of being a teacher."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/elementary-education/middle-grades-mathematics/","Diversify Your Skill Set with a Bachelor’s Degree in Elementary Education and Middle Grades Mathematics
Are you seeking a career that lets you make a positive impact on the next generation? Do you want the flexibility to teach at a variety of grade levels? Are you fascinated with mathematics and excited to share that passion with your future students?
If that sounds like you, Liberty’s 100% online Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Elementary Education – Middle Grades Mathematics degree can help! Throughout this program, you can develop the knowledge, credentials, and experience needed to become a licensed elementary school (K-6) teacher in Virginia.* Additionally, you can pursue an endorsement in middle grades mathematics and prepare to teach math at the middle school level.
At Liberty, we train qualified educators who can serve their students with skill and integrity. Partner with us and prepare for a rewarding career in the field of education.
*Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Bachelor’s in Elementary Education – Middle School Math Degree?
At Liberty, we’re committed to excellence. Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). You can pursue your B.Ed. degree with confidence knowing that our courses are of the highest quality.
Additionally, this is one of the first programs in the nation to offer a curriculum that is both 100% online and designed to prepare you for initial teaching licensure. You’ll study under seasoned professionals who are experts in the field of education and dedicated to teaching from a biblical perspective. That way, you can serve as a Champion for Christ in your future career.
Through this 100% online program, you can complete teacher licensure requirements set by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE). You could go on to teach in the state of Virginia or apply for reciprocity in another state. And, by completing over 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching, you can prepare to lead in the classroom with confidence.
What Will You Learn in Our B.Ed. in Elementary Education – Middle Grades Mathematics Degree Online?
This program provides core training in many aspects of elementary education. You will explore topics like curriculum development, teaching methods, instructional design, and classroom technology. You can also learn how to cultivate a positive learning environment and help students from various backgrounds thrive. Additionally, our courses provide an in-depth look at teaching foundational subjects — such as language arts, math, science, and reading — at the K-6 level.
With the middle grades math endorsement online, you can expand your skill set and prepare for future employment as a middle school math teacher. You’ll study curriculum and instructional strategies for middle school settings and learn how to teach a wide array of mathematical subjects to young adolescents. Some of the topics you can explore include mathematical reasoning, coordinate geometry, probability and statistics, and discrete mathematics. Completing practicum and student teaching hours will help you meet teacher licensure requirements and put your skills to the test in a hands-on environment.
Featured Courses
EDUC 225 – Instructional Design for Elementary and Middle School Classrooms
EDUC 412 – Middle School Curriculum and Instruction
MATH 128 – Elementary Functions and Coordinate Geometry
MATH 201 – Introduction to Probability and Statistics
Highlights of Liberty’s Elementary Education and Middle Grades Math Education Degree Online
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online education bachelor’s degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Earn your online B.Ed. degree in under 4 years.
Pursue licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia.
Complete over 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation."
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/elementary-education/middle-grades-science/","Residential Degree in Elementary Education: Middle Grades Science – Licensure
Increase your teaching skills with the B.Ed. in Elementary Education: Middle Grades Science from Liberty University. Here, you’ll not only gain the licensure you need to teach, but you’ll also get the practical, ethical, and legal understanding you need to meet the challenges of today’s teaching environments.
The B.Ed in Elementary Education: Middle Grades Science degree will give you two endorsements: one in elementary education and the other in middle grades Science 6-8. This attractive program makes you eligible for a Virginia state teaching license in two areas. To obtain a license in another state, follow reciprocity guidelines established by that state’s Department of Education.
Enjoy in-person classroom study with experienced faculty who are committed to providing quality education based on the principles of God’s Word. Develop a biblical worldview along with the type of leadership skills you’ll need in the classroom.
Students selecting and completing this cognate will have the opportunity to complete several content-specific courses in science. These courses will include environmental science, general chemistry, and astronomy.
Learn more about the B.Ed. in Elementary Education
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
See the online B.Ed. in Elementary Education: Middle Grades Science degree
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Elementary Education Courses
Introduction to Astronomy (PHSC 121)
Introduction to Education and Classroom Technologies (EDUC 201)
Environmental Science (NASC 315)
Teaching Elementary and Middle School Science (EDUC 324)
Elementary School Curriculum (EDUC 410)
Middle School Curriculum and Instruction (EDUC 412)
Career Opportunities in Elementary Education
A teaching license is required for many careers in the field of education. This degree leads to initial licensure in the state of Virginia. Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity. The Bachelor of Education degree will prepare you for a teaching career through studies of child development and cognitive processes. You will also explore research-based pedagogical approaches and instructional strategies. Course work will require you to complete projects and lesson plans that focus on science content. You will then complete the degree with a semester of student teaching that will acclimate you to the role of being a teacher."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/elementary-education/middle-grades-english/","Study Elementary and Middle Grades English to Help Children Read and Write
Do you want to help young people see the fun and value of reading and writing? Do you want to become a licensed elementary school teacher? Whether you want to teach elementary or middle school students, Liberty’s online B.Ed. in Elementary Education — Middle Grades English can help you get the skills and credentials you need.
Liberty’s B.Ed. in Elementary Education is one of only a few like it in the U.S. — and is one of the first 100% online bachelor’s degrees that leads to teacher licensure in Virginia. Through this online elementary education program, you can complete state requirements for teacher licensure, including core competencies, 90 practicum hours, and at least 1 full semester of student teaching. In addition to helping prepare you for success as a kindergarten and elementary school teacher, this degree can also equip you for middle grades education as an English studies teacher. 
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). Once you complete Virginia licensure requirements, you can apply for reciprocity in another state. Partner with Liberty and you can be classroom-ready after graduation!
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Our B.Ed. in Elementary Education with a Middle Grades English Studies Endorsement?
Liberty University’s education courses are provided in an online format to allow you to complete your degree in less time. With teacher training approved by the Virginia Department of Education, this elementary and middle grades teacher degree also allows you to complete your student teaching and practicums at a location near you. You can finish your degree without leaving your community.
At Liberty University, our mission is to Train Champions for Christ. We fulfill that mission by training the next generation of ethical and effective teachers. As an education student at Liberty, you can learn content areas and teaching and learning techniques in addition to gaining wisdom from our skilled faculty. Our education professors have years of experience in the elementary and middle grades teaching field and are excited to pass their knowledge on to you.
The middle grades English area of study can provide you with the specialized skills in teaching elementary grades English and developing reading and writing for middle schoolers. By pursuing the middle grade English endorsement, you can learn how to be a versatile and well-rounded teacher who is prepared to succeed in many learning environments.
What Will You Learn in Liberty’s B.Ed. in Elementary Education — Middle Grades English?
The middle grades English cognate requires students to complete 4 specialized courses in essential English language and literature topics. In addition to these courses, students who choose to add the middle grades English area of study will complete a 45-hour practicum in a middle school setting. This hands-on experience can fulfill state requirements for teaching licensure while helping you apply what you’ve learned to a real classroom.
Not only that but the elementary education program is also designed to include over 90 practicum hours and 1 full semester of student teaching, giving you opportunities for guided practice and application. This education degree is designed to prepare you to work with elementary and middle school English students alike.
Featured Courses
EDUC 225 — Instructional Design: Elementary
EDUC 318 — Teaching Reading to Diverse Learners
ENGL 221 — World Literature I
ENGL 333 — Modern Grammar
Our Online B.Ed. in Elementary Education — Middle Grades English Specialization Program Highlights
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online B.Ed. degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our B.Ed. is one of the first 100% online bachelor’s programs in the nation — and the only program in Virginia — to offer a curriculum that prepares you for initial teacher licensure.
Students enrolled in our online Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Elementary Education degree will have access to a wide variety of resources through Liberty’s research portal and extensive online library.
With our unique 100% online licensure track, you can complete your teaching licensure requirements and apply for licensure through the state of Virginia. You can then apply for reciprocity for equivalent licensure in other states.
Pursuing our online Bachelor of Education licensure tracks may make you eligible for the Federal TEACH Grant.
Gain experience by completing 90 hours of hands-on practicum and immerse yourself in a full semester of student teaching before graduation. 
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/elementary-education/middle-grades-social-science/","Residential Degree in Elementary Education: Middle Grades Social Science – Licensure
Broaden your career options with the B.Ed. in Elementary Education: Middle Grades Social Science from Liberty University. Here, you’ll not only gain the licensure you need to teach, but you’ll learn how to help children from diverse cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds achieve their educational best.
The B.Ed in Elementary Education: Middle Grades Social Science will give you two endorsements: one in elementary education and the other in middle grades Social Science 6-8. This attractive program makes you eligible for a Virginia state teaching license in two areas. To obtain a license in another state, follow reciprocity guidelines established by that state’s Department of Education.
Enjoy in-person classroom study with experienced faculty who are committed to providing quality education based on the principles of God’s Word. Develop a biblical worldview along with the type of leadership skills you’ll need in the classroom.
Students selecting and completing this cognate will have the opportunity to complete several content-specific courses in social science. These courses will include comparative civilization, economics, and American history.
Learn more about the B.Ed. in Elementary Education
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
See the online B.Ed. in Elementary Education: Middle Grades Social Science degree
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Elementary Education Courses
Survey of American History II (HIUS 222)
Teaching Elementary and Middle School Social Science (EDUC 322)
Behavior and Individual Differences (EDUC 350)
Comparative Civilization (HIWD 370)
Elementary School Curriculum (EDUC 410)
Middle School Curriculum and Instruction (EDUC 412)
Career Opportunities in Elementary Education
A teaching license is required for many careers in the field of education. This degree leads to initial licensure in the state of Virginia. Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity. The Bachelor of Education degree will prepare you for a teaching career through studies of child development and cognitive processes. You will also explore research-based pedagogical approaches and instructional strategies. Course work will require you to complete projects and lesson plan that focus on social science content. You will then complete the degree with a semester of student teaching that will acclimate you to the role of being a teacher."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/elementary-education/middle-grades-science/","Gain More Flexibility in Your Career with a B.Ed. in Elementary Education and Middle Grades Science Option From Liberty
Pair your love of teaching with your passion for science and use that passion to educate others. Our B.Ed. is designed to make it easier to earn a dual endorsement on your future teaching license — this program allows you to earn both an elementary school and middle grades science endorsement at the same time! Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Elementary Education – Middle Grades Science degree can prepare you with the knowledge, experience, and licensure you’ll need to become an elementary school teacher with the additional endorsement for teaching middle school science classes.
Liberty’s B.Ed. in Elementary Education is one of only a few like it in the U.S., as it is both 100% online and leads to teacher licensure in Virginia. Through this program, you can complete the core competencies, student teaching, and practicum requirements necessary to earn your Virginia teaching license.
Training young minds for the future is a challenging yet rewarding job. We understand the importance of being an educator and influencer for the next generation of difference-makers. That’s why we have designed our B.Ed. to provide you with all the tools you will need to become a successful educator. Our courses contain cutting-edge knowledge and experiential training all rooted in a biblical worldview – allowing you to graduate as a well-prepared professional of integrity.
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor of Education in Elementary Education – Middle Grades Science Degree?
At Liberty, our mission is Training Champions for Christ. In keeping with that mission, we strive for excellence in all that we do – our academics, our professors, our standards, and more. Here is what you can look forward to by pursuing your online elementary with middle grades education degree with us:
This is one of the first programs in the nation to offer you a curriculum that is both 100% online and prepares you for initial teaching licensure.
Your education professors are invested in your success as a student, dedicated to teaching your courses from a Christian perspective, and equipped with years of real-life experience in the classroom.
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Upon graduation, you will have completed licensure requirements approved by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE), allowing you to teach in the state of Virginia or apply for reciprocity for licensure in other states.
Be classroom-ready with over 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching.
What Will You Learn in Our B.Ed. in Elementary Education – Middle Grades Science Degree?
Throughout your B.Ed. degree, you will be learning professional development to help you succeed in any field as well as specifics on teaching and scientific concepts. You can get a thorough background in educational theories and become equipped to deliver safe, creative, and fun classes. Our program prepares you with subjects like communication, mathematics, and biblical principles that can be used in your professional and personal life.
You’ll also learn how to teach students through hands-on, practical experience in your student teaching hours. Some of the education concepts you’ll study include:
Behavioral and individual differences in students
Elementary school curriculum and instruction
How to help children from diverse cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds achieve their educational best
How to teach literature to children and adolescents
Middle school curriculum and instruction
Additionally, the middle grades science option will expand on your scientific knowledge, allowing you to specialize in this coursework as a middle school science teacher. You’ll take courses on chemistry, environmental science, biology, earth science, physics, and more.
Elementary Education Featured Courses
EDUC 225 – Instructional Design: Elementary
EDUC 360 – Foundations of Education
EDUC 410 – Elementary School Curriculum
EDUC 412 – Middle School Curriculum and Instruction
NASC 315 – Environmental Science*
*Course guide coming soon
Highlights of Our B.Ed. in Elementary Education – Middle Grades Science Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
This is one of the first 100% online bachelor’s programs in the nation to offer a curriculum that prepares you for initial teacher licensure.
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Graduate with licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia and other states through reciprocity.*
Receive at least 90 practicum hours and a full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
Learn from professors who are professionals in the field of education and are dedicated to our mission of Training Champions for Christ.
Complete your B.Ed. in Elementary Education – Middle Grades Science in less than 4 years!
Pursuing our online licensure-track Bachelor of Education may make you eligible for the Federal TEACH Grant"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/elementary-education/middle-grades-social-science/","Prepare Children for the Future with Liberty’s Online B.Ed. in Elementary Ed. – Middle Grades Social Science Specialization
Are you interested in becoming a licensed elementary school teacher? Maybe you’re most passionate about teaching younger children, but you’d like to keep your options open because you can see yourself being a middle school social studies teacher someday. If so, Liberty’s B.Ed. in Elementary Education – Middle Grades Social Science degree may be for you.
Liberty’s B.Ed. in Elementary Education is one of only a few like it in the U.S. – a 100% online bachelor’s degree that leads to teacher licensure in Virginia. Through this online elementary education program, you will complete state-mandated requirements for teacher licensure – including core competencies, student teaching, and practicum hours. In addition to preparing you for success as an elementary school teacher, this degree can also prepare you for success in middle grades education as a social studies teacher. 
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). Once you complete Virginia licensure requirements, you can apply for reciprocity in another state.* Partner with Liberty and learn the teaching skills you need to be successful.
*Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s B.Ed. in Elementary Education with a Middle School Social Studies Endorsement?
The format of Liberty University’s education courses, which are approved by the VDOE and offered in a fully online setting, allow you to complete your degree at your own pace. In addition, this degree program allows you to complete your student teaching and practicums at a location near you, so you can finish your degree without leaving your community. 
At Liberty University, our mission is to Train Champions for Christ. As an education student at Liberty, you’ll be taught teaching and learning techniques from experts in education. Our dedicated professors, who have years of experience in teaching elementary and middle school, instruct from a biblical worldview and have a vested interest in your success.
The B.Ed. in Elementary Education with a middle school add-on in social studies can provide you with two endorsements on your teaching license: elementary education K-6 and middle education social science. By pursuing the middle-grades social science endorsement, you can become a versatile and well-rounded teacher who is prepared to succeed in a number of learning environments.
What Will You Learn in the Bachelor’s in Elementary Education Online – Middle Grades Social Science Program?
The middle grades social science specialization requires students to complete 5 additional courses that are specific to social science. In addition to these courses, students who choose to add the middle grades social science endorsement are required to complete a minimum of 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching.
Further, the elementary education program requires 3 practicums. Completing the B.Ed. in Elementary Education – Middle Grades Social Science endorsement will require you to complete a total of 4 practicums and 1 student teaching requirement. This degree provides more than just an online elementary education degree. It prepares you to work with elementary and middle school students alike.
Featured Courses
EDUC 225 – Instructional Design for Elementary and Middle Classrooms
EDUC 318 – Teaching Reading to Diverse Learners 
EDUC 410 – Elementary School Curriculum
EDUC 412 – Middle School Curriculum
HIWD 370 – Comparative Civilization
Highlights of Our Online B.Ed. in Elementary Education – Middle Grades Social Science Endorsement
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our B.Ed. is one of the first 100% online bachelor’s programs in the nation to offer a curriculum that prepares you for initial teacher licensure.
Students enrolled in our online Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Elementary Education degree will have access to a wide variety of resources through Liberty’s research portal and extensive online library.
With our unique 100% online licensure track, you can complete your teaching licensure requirements for the Commonwealth of Virginia. You can then apply for reciprocity for equivalent licensure in other states.
Pursuing our online Bachelor of Education licensure tracks may make you eligible for the Federal TEACH Grant.
Receive hands-on experience with 90 hours of practicum courses and 1 semester of student teaching. 
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/elementary-education/special-education/","Residential Degree in Elementary Education: Special Education General Curriculum K-6 – Licensure
Engage and inspire all children to achieve their educational best with the B.Ed. in Elementary Education: Special Education (SPED) General Curriculum K-6 from Liberty University. Here, you’ll not only gain the licensure you need to teach, but you’ll learn how to apply developed skills in a hands-on teaching environment specific to elementary education and special education.
The B.Ed in Elementary Education: Special Education General Curriculum K-6 degree will give you two endorsements: one in elementary education and the other in SPED general education K-6. This attractive program makes you eligible for a Virginia state teaching license in two areas. To obtain a license in another state, follow reciprocity guidelines established by that state’s Department of Education.
Enjoy in-person classroom study with experienced faculty who are committed to providing quality education based on the principles of God’s Word. Develop a biblical worldview along with the type of leadership skills you’ll need in the classroom.
Students selecting and completing this degree will have the opportunity to complete several courses in special education. These courses will include writing IEPs, behavior intervention, and transitional plans.
Learn more about the B.Ed. in Elementary Education
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
See the online B.Ed. in Elementary Education degree: Special Education General Curriculum K-6 degree
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Elementary Education Courses
Introduction to Education and Classroom Technologies (EDUC 201)
Teaching Reading to Diverse Learners (EDUC 318)
Special Education Law and Characteristics (EDSP 323)
Behavior and Individual Differences (EDUC 350)
Elementary School Curriculum (EDUC 410)
Assessment and Transition Planning for Diverse Learners (EDSP 473)
Career Opportunities in Elementary Education
A teaching license is required for many careers in the field of education. This degree leads to initial licensure in the state of Virginia. Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity. The Bachelor of Education degree will prepare you for a teaching career through studies of child development and cognitive processes. You will also explore research-based pedagogical approaches and instructional strategies. Course work will require you to complete projects and lesson plans that focus on special education and teaching and working with students with special needs. You will then complete the degree with a semester of student teaching that will acclimate you to the role of being a teacher."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/elementary-education/","Equip Children for a Bright Future with a Non-Licensure Online BS in Elementary Education Degree
Children need support in education to have the best chance at a successful future. Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science (BS) in Elementary Education Interdisciplinary Studies online degree program can provide you with the tools you need to help children grow into healthy, happy adults. Our elementary education online degree is designed to equip you with foundational skills in learning theory and practice. You can also examine current trends and practices used in both public and private schools – which can help you build up kids and cultivate learning.
Earning an online bachelor’s in elementary education interdisciplinary studies degree can equip you to achieve your goals and succeed in Christian school, private school, and homeschool settings. This elementary education bachelor’s degree online can also help prepare you for work in childcare facilities, churches, and in public school settings as a paraprofessional.
Our online degree in elementary education is designed to give you pre-teacher preparation with the opportunity to practice creating lesson plans and units. You can also learn specialized assessment methods such as adaptive learning and direct instruction. This non-licensure, online elementary education degree seeks to prepare students for our Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) program. 
Students who complete the non-licensure Bachelor of Science in Education degree can apply to one of our many CAEP-approved licensure-track Master of Arts in Teaching, graduate education programs. With these credentials, you can be confident that you can be ready to meet the challenges of the field.
Please note: Liberty’s BS in Elementary Education Interdisciplinary Studies is a non-licensure track. This program is intended to prepare students for non-licensed teaching roles or to continue into a licensure program at a later time. If you would like to pursue a teaching license through your bachelor’s degree, see the Bachelor of Elementary Education (BEd).
Common Questions
Here are some common questions and answers about our online elementary education degree:
What is elementary education?
Can I earn a teaching degree online?
What’s the cost of a BS in elementary education degree online?
Why Choose Liberty University’s BS in Elementary Education Interdisciplinary Studies Degree?
Liberty’s BS in Elementary Education degree is offered as an online program so you can complete your courses from the comfort of your own home. Our flexible coursework is designed to fit your schedule. You can study learning theories, teaching best practices, and cutting-edge teaching technology. You can also learn from professionals with real-world classroom experience who can mentor you in your teaching process.
You can also have hands-on teaching experience through one of our online education degree’s optional practicums. One practicum, EDUC 398, requires at least 45 classroom hours. EDUC 390 requires 300 supervised hours and satisfies one requirement needed for Association of Christian Schools International (ACSI) certification. You can also complete a capstone course if you’re not interested in completing a practicum. Invest in Liberty’s online teaching bachelor’s degree with the confidence that your degree has met rigorous education standards.
What Are the Benefits of Liberty’s BS in Elementary Education Degree Online?
Liberty’s online teaching degrees can help you take advantage of the increased need for elementary education professionals. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) estimates that the median pay for kindergarten and elementary school teachers in 2021 was $61,350.*
The BLS also suggests that the job market for elementary teachers will grow by 7% by 2030.* Liberty’s BS in Elementary Education can help you stand out in the marketplace. And with professional skills that apply to any industry, you can also learn how to pursue many career options outside of the classroom.
Our bachelor’s degree in elementary education was ranked in the top 5 for best online elementary education programs by Bestcolleges.com.
You can study how to meet many teaching area needs with this online elementary education degree’s broad base of topic areas.
Don’t settle for just any online education degree – choose a program from a university that has been pioneering distance education since 1985. By partnering with Liberty, you can gain valuable skills and prepare for a variety of career options without having to leave the comfort of home. Choose Liberty: a university with a vested interest in your success. 
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Kindergarten and Elementary School Teachers (viewed online July 18, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Elementary Education Degree?
Completing Liberty University’s online teaching degree in elementary education can give you a thorough background in all aspects of education. You can study education theories and how to create a safe, creative, and fun learning environment. With these skills, you can help children from diverse cultural and economic backgrounds learn and grow.
Liberty’s online bachelor’s degree in elementary education is designed to prepare students with a practical, ethical, and legal understanding of education. This background is necessary to ensure that these students can meet the challenges of current-day teaching.
While completing Liberty’s online bachelor’s in elementary education, you can also study critical learning theories. Through this study, you can create strong portfolios and curriculum that demonstrate your expertise to future employers. If you complete the optional practicum, you can apply these skills in a hands-on teaching environment.
This degree program has been designed with your success in mind. As a pioneer in distance education since 1985, we understand what it takes to develop a degree program that challenges you to grasp new concepts while respecting your personal commitments – like your job, family, and community. Take the next step in your career by partnering with Liberty: a school with a vested interest in your success.
Elementary Education Degree Online Featured Courses
EDUC 200 – Principles of Education
EDUC 205 – Learning Theory and Portfolio Development
EDUC 304 – Classroom Management for Teachers
EDUC 305 – Educational Philosophy for Teachers
Highlights of Liberty’s Online Elementary Education Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online BS in Elementary Education degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can gain a broad-based foundation in major course areas needed to seek licensure at the master’s level.
You can develop classroom management skills and study elementary education research to help you keep up with the latest best practices.
Through the optional practicum built into our online bachelor’s degree in elementary education interdisciplinary studies, you can gain hands-on experience in your community."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/elementary-education/special-education/","Help Kids in Need with Liberty’s B.Ed. in Elementary Education – Special Education Degree
Do you want licensure in elementary education with the option to help children with special needs? We’re here to help you get the skills and credentials you need! With Liberty’s 100% online Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Elementary Education – Special Education degree, you can become an elementary school teacher while learning how to help students with special needs learn and grow.
Gain the benefit of essential education theory, studying learning disabilities, and learning adaptation techniques that you can easily apply to your work in the classroom. With Liberty’s 100% online B.Ed. in Elementary Education degree, you can meet licensure requirements and get the hands-on experience you need without traveling to a traditional university campus.
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). This B.Ed. in Elementary Education program is one of the first 100% online tracks approved by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE) to prepare students for teaching licensure. Students who complete this bachelor’s degree will complete the content competencies, student teaching, and practicum requirements needed for a Virginia state teaching license with endorsements in elementary education and special education general curriculum (K-6).*
*Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online B.Ed. in Elementary Education – Special Education Degree?
At Liberty, our mission is Training Champions for Christ. In keeping with that mission, we strive for excellence in all that we do – our academics, our professors, our standards, and more. Here is what you can look forward to by pursuing your online elementary with special education degree with us:
This is one of the first bachelor’s programs in the nation to offer you a curriculum that is both 100% online and prepares you for initial teaching licensure.
Your education professors are invested in your success as a student, dedicated to teaching your courses from a Christian perspective, and equipped with years of real-life experience in the classroom.
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Upon graduation, you will have completed licensure requirements approved by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE), allowing you to teach in the state of Virginia or apply for reciprocity for licensure in other states.
Be classroom-ready with over 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching.
What Will You Learn in Our Online B.Ed. in Elementary Education – Special Education Degree Program?
Throughout your B.Ed. degree, you will be learning professional development to help you succeed in your field. You can get a thorough background in educational theories and become equipped to deliver safe, creative, and fun classes. Our program also prepares you through coursework in subjects like communication, mathematics, and biblical studies that can be used in your professional and personal life.
Additionally, your special education specialization will concentrate on current, research-based education theories and best practices that can prepare you to work effectively with children who have special needs. You will explore philosophical, legal, and sociological principles of special education as well as essential learning theories, equipping you to engage in research and scholarship.
Through this licensure track’s 90+ practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching, you will work in a school in your area to get hands-on classroom experience that will help you apply theory to practice. With this experience, you can meet licensure requirements and have the opportunity to gain reciprocity in your state through Virginia teaching licensure.
Elementary Education Featured Courses
EDSP 323 – Special Education Law and Characteristics
EDSP 413 – Inclusive Planning for Diverse Learners
EDUC 350 – Behavior and Individual Differences
EDUC 410 – Elementary School Curriculum
Our Online B.Ed. in Elementary Education – Special Education Degree Program Highlights
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
This is one of the first 100% online bachelor’s programs in the nation to offer a curriculum that prepares you for initial teacher licensure.
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Graduate with licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia and other states through reciprocity.*
Receive at least 90 practicum hours and a full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
Learn from professors who are professionals in the field of education and are dedicated to our mission of Training Champions for Christ.
Complete your B.Ed. in Elementary Education – Special Education in less than 4 years!
Pursuing our online licensure-track Bachelor of Education may make you eligible for the Federal TEACH Grant.
*Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/engineering/","Residential Bachelor of Education in Engineering Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Licensure
Gain skills to challenge young minds through your Bachelor of Education in Engineering Education, Grades 6-12 degree. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses in engineering education. Our education methods classes are designed to give you the tools to meet the needs of every learner. You’ll learn how to utilize the strengths all students bring to the classroom. In-field classroom experiences throughout the program will allow you to put the theory you learn into practice. Classes in economics, dynamics, and statistics will prepare you to teach these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in engineering education. Liberty faculty will show you how to view teaching through a biblical worldview, equipping you to make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Engineering Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about engineering and want to help young learners develop the same zeal. You’ll have the opportunity to gain state licensure and the qualifications needed to teach students at the middle or high school level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Engineering Education Courses
Engineering Economy (ENGI 220)
Introduction to Electrical and Electronic Circuits (ENGE 211)
Fluid Dynamics (ENGR 315)
Calculus and Analytical Geometry III (MATH 231)
Thermodynamics (PHYS 320)
Career Opportunities in Engineering Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach Engineering Education in grades 6-12.
Secondary Engineering School Teacher
K-12 Education Consultant
K-12 Curriculum Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/english/","Residential Bachelor of Education in English Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Licensure
Let us help you make your teaching goals a reality with a Bachelor of Education in English Education, Grades 6-12 degree. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses in English education. Our education methods classes are designed to give you the tools to meet the needs of every learner. You’ll learn how to utilize the strengths all students bring to the classroom. In-field classroom experiences throughout the program will allow you to put the theory you learn into practice. Classes in world literature, expository writing, and modern grammar will prepare you to teach these subjects. 
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in literature and writing education. Liberty faculty will show you how to view teaching through a biblical worldview. You’ll be ready to make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in English Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about literature and want to help learners develop the same zest. This degree will allow you to begin a career in English Education. You’ll have the opportunity to gain state licensure and the qualifications needed to teach students at the middle or high school level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
The English Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) degree is also available online.
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured English Education Courses
Modern Grammar (ENGL 333)
Expository Writing (ENGL 307)
Shakespeare (ENGL 322)
Etymology (ENGL 334)
English Literature I (ENGL 215)
Career Opportunities in English Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach English Education in grades 6-12.
Secondary English School Teacher
K-12 Education Consultant
K-12 Curriculum Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/english/","B.A. in English
Residential B.A. in English Program
Prepare for a wide range of career opportunities or graduate studies with a Bachelor of Arts in English. Learn essential writing and problem-solving skills that will be useful in further study, the workplace, and in life.
With a degree in English, you can pursue a career in a variety of fields including journalism, education, law, and others.
This degree is offered through the Department of English. See the full list of English degrees offered at Liberty, including the Master of Arts in English.
Academic Information for the English Major
English Courses You Could Take
Expository Writing (ENGL 307)
Shakespeare (ENGL 322)
Modern Grammar (ENGL 333)
History of the English Language (ENGL 364)
Literary Criticism (ENGL 433)
Start Your Career in English
Career Opportunities for Writing Majors
Administration
Marketing
Public Relations
Human Resources
Civil Services
Law
Ministry
Missions
Elementary Education
Secondary Education
Higher Education
Writing
Publishing
Editing
Tutor
TESL"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/english-and-writing/creative-writing/","Your Career in Creative Writing Starts Now
Many people write only when they are required to do so for school or work. Many — but not you. Ever since you could read, you knew you had a deeper appreciation for English and writing. Now imagine taking that passion and making it your life’s work. With the proper training and credentials, you can create a career dedicated to an art you love.
Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in English and Writing is designed for writers like you. Our program focuses on providing you with the skills you’ll need for success, like critical thinking, technical writing, literary analysis, and methods of research. And with a specialization in creative writing, you can study what interests you most — creating captivating stories.
Employers today are in need of professionals who have strong writing skills. Whether you use your degree to land an editorial job or become a freelance writer, your ability to use the English language effectively can set you apart. And while you hone your skills through Liberty’s English degree, you’ll be learning under professors who are just as passionate about writing as you are. 
Why Choose Liberty’s English and Writing Degree?
When you choose Liberty to pursue your online creative writing degree, you are choosing a flexible and affordable education. Our online bachelor’s degree courses are offered in 8-week formats, with no set login times, and at a tuition rate that hasn’t increased in 8 years!
You’ll also have the exciting opportunity to study course content developed by New York Times bestselling author, Karen Kingsbury. Learn from her years of success as an author, screenwriter, blogger, and producer, as well as her ability to stand firm in her Christian faith in a largely secular industry.
At Liberty, you’ll get to pursue a degree you want in a field you love — all from the comfort of your own home. Study under well-respected and experienced faculty without the need to travel for traditional on-campus courses. Discover the many reasons why Liberty is a great place to prepare for a career in professional writing.
What Will You Learn in an English and Creative Writing Degree Online?
Liberty’s online creative writing degree will give you the opportunity to study history’s most famous writers through courses on some of the greatest works of literature. And with training in advanced grammar and technical writing, you’ll sharpen your ability to write at all levels and styles.
Liberty’s B.S. in English and Writing – Creative Writing degree will also train you in:
How to write compelling stories that engage readers
Organizing information and adapting your writing to different styles 
Tailoring your writing to specific audiences and markets
How to market your projects and receive new writing opportunities
Featured Courses
ENGL 102 – Composition and Literature 
ENGL 333 – Modern Grammar
ENGL 341 – American Realism and Naturalism
WRIT 201 – Introduction to Creative Writing
Highlights of Our Online English and Creative Writing Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University has partnered with New York Times bestselling author and Christian novelist, Karen Kingsbury, to create the Karen Kingsbury Center for Writing. Your curriculum includes content developed by Karen Kingsbury herself.
Liberty University holds institutional accreditation through the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/english/","Become a Licensed English Teacher with Liberty’s Online B.Ed. in English Education 
You have a vision for making a difference through education, and we have the resources you need to make that vision a reality. Our Bachelor of Education in English Education can prepare you to teach middle and high school students the analytical skills they need to become well-rounded, thoughtful adults. 
Grounded in a biblical worldview, our B.Ed. in English combines academic excellence with practical, hands-on experience in the classroom. As an English teacher, you can have a unique opportunity to directly influence the values and worldviews of your students. Partner with us, and make a difference for future generations. 
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor of Education Program?
Liberty’s unique licensure-track B.Ed. programs provide 100% online, Virginia Department of Education (VDOE) approved courses. With hands-on experience through student teaching and practicums in a classroom near you, you can learn to apply teaching theory to real-world problems. 
With Liberty’s mission to Train Champions for Christ, you can be confident that you’ll study under dedicated professors who teach from a biblical worldview and are passionate about building up teachers who pursue excellence and Christ-like compassion. Our faculty have years of experience in their fields and can help you learn how to seamlessly integrate biblical principles into your profession. 
Designed to provide maximum flexibility and convenience as a fully online program, our bachelor’s degree in English education for 6-12 grade students can give you the foundation you need to thrive as a teacher — without ever having to travel to a university campus. 
What Will You Learn in Our B.Ed. in English Education Degree? 
Liberty’s B.Ed. in English Education is broken down into 4 core foundations: education courses, practicum and gate courses, English courses, and student teaching. Your education courses explore the major aspects any teacher has to learn, such as evaluating student learning, creating curriculum, and seeing behavioral and individual differences between students. 
As an English education student, you can complete additional courses focused on grammar, literature, writing styles, and etymology. The practicum and student teaching courses will then put your knowledge to the test. You can work in the classroom alongside a licensed teacher to see how the principles you’ve learned apply in the real world. 
Featured Courses
ENGL 215 – English Literature I* 
ENGL 322 – Shakespeare 
ENGL 333 – Modern Grammar 
ENGL 334 – Etymology
*Course guide coming soon 
Highlights of Our B.Ed. Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field. 
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 7 years – and counting. 
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Graduate with licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia. 
Complete 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation. 
Observe and teach in a variety of school settings with your required practicum and student teaching hours. 
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/english-and-writing/","Develop a Valuable and Diverse Skill Set with Our Online English and Writing Degree
Are you interested in becoming a journalist, educator, or writer? Do you want to pursue a career in technical writing, website content writing, or social media management? Whatever your career goals, Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in English and Writing degree online can help you meet them. 
Content is everywhere — every company needs someone who can write skillfully and professionally. Businesses are eager to take on skilled writers who can help them write reports, webpages, advertisements, articles, and all kinds of written material. With an online degree in English and writing, you could go on to use your skills in tech companies, engineering labs, newspapers, magazines, or a variety of other areas. 
And when you graduate from Liberty’s online program, you can have confidence that your degree from this accredited university meets the highest industry standards and can help prepare you for an exciting future. Prepare to take the next step in your career by furthering your education with us today!
Why Choose Liberty’s B.S. in English and Writing Online Degree?
When you pursue an online education from Liberty University, you’ll get much more than a degree. From online networking to professional mentorship to courses taught from a biblical worldview, the Liberty experience is an investment in your success. 
Liberty University is accredited through the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). This means you can trust that the knowledge and skills you acquire throughout your degree program will be recognized and respected by employers as well as other schools and universities. 
At Liberty, our mission is Training Champions for Christ, so biblical principles, values, and ethics will be integrated into every area of your educational experience. We take your priorities — like flexibility, your job, family, and social life — into account when developing our online programs. Our 8-week course options are designed to work with your schedule, so you can continue to do the things that are important to you while you pursue your degree online.
What Will You Learn in Our B.S. in English and Writing Online Degree?
With a bachelor’s degree in English and writing, you’ll be able to pursue the writing-related career field you’re passionate about. You can study classic literature, including Christian literature and authors, as well as improve your creative, grant, technical, and inspirational writing abilities. Every course you take will be presented through a biblical worldview, so you can learn how to integrate values and ethics into your career.
Featured Courses
ENGL 102 – Composition and Literature 
ENGL 333 – Modern Grammar
ENGL 341 – American Realism and Naturalism
WRIT 201 – Introduction to Creative Writing
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/english-and-writing/christian-literature/","Increase Your Knowledge of Christian Literature as You Develop Marketable Writing Skills with Our Online English and Writing Degree
It has been said that to be a good writer, you must read voraciously. To develop your skills, you need to examine the works of great writers with a critical eye and learn from them. Liberty’s Bachelor of Science (B.S.) in English and Writing – Christian Literature combines your love of Christian literature with marketable writing and creative thinking skills. Whether you are interested in teaching, professional writing, or working in the world of social media and marketing, you can gain the necessary skills for a variety of fields.
Our Christian literature specialization will allow you to examine important works from great Christian writers throughout history. As you study Christian literature, you can develop useful skills in research, technical writing, grant writing, and creative writing. Additionally, you can learn about other major non-Christian writers to round out your education.
This English and writing program offers you the chance to further expand your knowledge and skills with up to 33 credit hours of electives. This will give you the chance to enhance your writing skills in a certain field or further your knowledge of various areas that may supplement your writing ability. Prepare to take the next step in your career by earning your bachelor’s degree with us today!
Why Choose Liberty’s English and Writing Degree?
When you pursue a degree in Christian literature at Liberty, you’ll have the benefit of studying at a university that has partnered with New York Times bestselling author and Christian novelist Karen Kingsbury to develop some of our creative writing courses. With online networking opportunities, professional mentorship, and courses taught from a biblical worldview, the Liberty experience is an investment in your success.
Additionally, Liberty University is accredited through the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). This means you can trust that the knowledge and skills you acquire throughout your degree program are of the highest quality.
At Liberty, our mission is to Train Champions for Christ – so biblical principles, values, and ethics will be integrated into every area of your educational experience. We take your priorities — like your job, family, and social life — into account when developing our online programs. Our 8-week course options are designed to work with your schedule, so you can continue to do the things that are important to you as you pursue your degree online.
What Will You Learn in Our B.S. in English and Writing – Christian Literature Online Degree?
With a bachelor’s degree in Christian literature, you’ll be able to gain marketable skills in critical thinking, writing, and analysis. In addition to taking courses that can help strengthen the critical and creative aspects of your writing, you will have the opportunity to focus your studies in Christian literature.
You will study literary works that stretch over 2,000 years of Christian history. This degree covers early Christian writers, modern writers, and a broad range of literature that is shaped by the Christian worldview. You will also read selected texts from 19th- through 21st-century Christian writers on the struggle between good and evil.
No Christian literature program would be complete without focusing on 2 of the greatest Christian authors of the last century: C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien. Many students are familiar with Narnia and The Lord of the Rings but have not read these authors’ other pieces. Our Christian literature program will explore a wide variety of works to help expand your literary knowledge.
As you study Christian literature, you can also enhance your writing abilities and gain editing skills for publishing while learning creative writing, grant writing, and technical writing. You can develop critical thinking skills as you strengthen your knowledge of Christian literature. Every course you take will be presented through a Christian worldview, so you can learn how to integrate biblical values and ethics into your career.
Featured Courses
ENGL 360 – Christian Fantasy Literature* 
ENGL 405 – Literature of the Bible*
ENGL 460 – Christian Literature
ENGL 465 – Lewis and Tolkien*
*Course guide coming soon
Highlights of Our Christian Literature Online English Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online English and writing degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University has partnered with New York Times bestselling author and Christian novelist Karen Kingsbury to create the Karen Kingsbury Center for Creative Writing. Your curriculum includes content developed by Karen Kingsbury herself.
Liberty University holds institutional accreditation through the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/english-and-writing/journalism/","Experience the Freedom to Travel and Learn with an Online Bachelor’s Degree in Journalism
Good writing has the ability to create a profound effect on readers. When written skillfully, a blog post, news article, or speech can make readers think, smile, or laugh, and when shared, these powerful words can bring people from all walks of life together. Your talent in this area can be used to help inspire and teach people — people you could only have reached through writing. 
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 64% of writers and authors are self-employed, creating their own office hours and working anywhere they have access to a computer.* If you’ve dreamed about a fast-paced career that lets you have the flexibility to travel or make your own schedule, a degree in journalism would be a great fit!
But a career in journalism allows you to do more than travel — it allows you to pursue your love for lifelong learning. As a reporter or journalist, you can be a part of researching stories, interviewing expert sources, and uncovering the truth about situations. Your knowledge can then be used to educate and inspire others.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Writers and authors: work environment, 2019 (viewed online August 22, 2019). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
Why Choose Liberty’s B.S. in English and Writing – Journalism Degree?
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, most full-time, professional writers are expected to have a bachelor’s degree in English, communications, or journalism.** Employers are looking for writers who are adaptable, creative, determined, persuasive, perceptive, and most importantly, skilled at writing. Choosing Liberty’s B.S. in English and Writing can help you develop mastery in all of these areas.
But with a rapidly changing industry like American journalism, where can a degree in this field take you? Careers in journalism are no longer restricted to just newspaper and print media. As almost every industry is impacted by technological advancements, an online writing degree can help you stay abreast of current market trends and open doors to write for popular online mediums.
Choosing a nonprofit, Christian university to pursue your bachelor’s degree can also help you create work that is above reproach. With the sway politics has on journalism, a degree founded on biblical principles can help you stand firm in your beliefs while still producing content that matches or exceeds the industry’s standard for excellence.
**Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Writers and authors: how to become one, 2019 (viewed online August 22, 2019). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Writing and Journalism Degree?
Employers are looking for writers who are creative, adaptable, and persuasive, so our online journalism degree focuses on equipping you to hone those skills as you develop your writing abilities.
At Liberty, you’ll have the opportunity to learn from New York Times bestselling author, Karen Kingsbury. Kingsbury provides expert content for many of the core courses in this journalism degree, allowing you to learn from her years of experience and success as an author, screenwriter, blogger, and producer.
Liberty’s B.S. in English and Writing – Journalism degree can also help train you in:
How to market your projects and receive new writing opportunities
How to write compelling stories that engage readers
Organizing information and adapting your writing to different styles
Tailoring your writing to specific audiences and markets
Featured Courses
ENGL 102 – Composition and Literature
ENGL 333 – Modern Grammar
ENGL 341 – American Realism and Naturalism
WRIT 201 – Introduction to Creative Writing
Highlights of Our English and Writing – Journalism Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University has partnered with New York Times bestselling author and Christian novelist, Karen Kingsbury, to create the Karen Kingsbury Center for Writing. Your curriculum includes content developed by Karen Kingsbury herself.
Liberty University holds institutional accreditation through the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC)."
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/english-as-a-second-language/","Residential Bachelor of Education in English as a Second Language Education, Grades P-12 (B.Ed.) – Licensure
Make an impact on young lives with your Bachelor of Education in English as a Second Language Education, Grades P-12 degree. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses in ESL education. Our education methods classes are designed to give you the tools to meet the needs of every learner. You’ll learn how to utilize the strengths all students bring to the classroom. In-field classroom experiences throughout the program will allow you to put the theory you learn into practice. Classes in grammar, linguistics, and cultural anthropology will prepare you to teach these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in language education. Liberty faculty will show you how to view teaching through a biblical worldview. You’ll be ready to make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in English as a Second Language Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about teaching English. This degree will allow you to begin a career in English as a Second Language Education. You’ll have the opportunity to gain state licensure and the qualifications needed in English as a Second Language Education for grades P-12. 
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
View the Advising Guide for this program
The English as a Second Language Education, Grades P-12 (B.Ed.) degree is also available online.
Academics: English as a Second Language Education, Grades P-12
Featured English as a Second Language Education Courses
Modern Grammar (ENGL 333)
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology (LING 300)
World Languages (LING 453)
Applied Linguistics (TESL 302)
Second Language Acquisition (TESL 403)
Career Opportunities in ESL Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach English as a Second Language Education in grades P-12.
Secondary English as a Second Language (ESL) School Teacher
K-12 Education Consultant
K-12 Curriculum Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/exercise-science/","B.S. in Exercise Science

Request Info Apply Now
Residential Exercise Science Program
The Bachelor of Science in Exercise Science prepares students for careers in the health and fitness industry, as well as graduate studies in exercise physiology, physical therapy, occupational therapy, chiropractic, and other health professions.
The Exercise Science program at Liberty University is designed to produce exercise science professionals who will impact the world of sports, fitness, and wellness. The program will provide the student with the knowledge, skills, and abilities to assess, prescribe exercise for, and monitor clients in a variety of health, wellness, and fitness settings. This program of study provides the student with a thorough immersion into the field of exercise science, by using a combination of classroom, laboratory, practicum, and internship experiences.
Based on the Annual Exercise Science Alumni Survey of 2022, the Exercise Science program has a positive placement rate of 96%.
The B.S. in Exercise Science is offered through the Department of Allied Health Professions.
Exercise Science (B.S.) Concentrations
Accreditation
The Exercise Science Program at Liberty University is accredited by the Commission for the Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP). 
Admission Requirements
View Liberty’s undergraduate admissions requirements
Exercise Science Program Handbook
Exercise Science Program Handbook (PDF)
Confidentiality Agreement Form (PDF)
ACSM and NSCA Certification Information
ACSM EP-C Exam Information
NSCA CSCS Exam Information (PDF)
State Licensure/Certification Disclosure
The Bachelor of Science in Exercise Science degree program meets the educational requirements to prepare students to sit for one of the following national certifications in the field of exercise science as required by the programs degree completion plan. Testing for these certifications is required during the student’s senior year. Currently there are no additional state requirements beyond certification.
ACSM Certified Exercise Physiologist
NSCS Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialist
Prospective students should be aware that each state has different professional licensure and certification requirements governing various occupations. Liberty University works to confirm if its educational programs meet the educational prerequisites for professional licensure or certification outside the Commonwealth of Virginia and updates this information each year. Students who plan to pursue licensure outside the Commonwealth of Virginia should be aware that state licensure requirements are subject to changes. Students are ultimately responsible for verifying their individual eligibility for state licensure and satisfying any requirements imposed thereby. While a program may originally meet the educational requirements for licensure, changes in requirements could impact the program’s ability to meet any new educational requirements. Students are strongly encouraged to check with their state licensure board to confirm licensure requirements and obtain additional guidance as needed from the respective licensure board.
State Licensure/Certification
To view the licensure/certification requirements for your state.
Location Change
At any time you may notify us of a location change that could affect your licensure disclosure information. We require that you provide us official notification by completing the State Change Notification form. Any address changes done through your myLU portal will not be considered an official address change and will not generate an updated disclosure."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/english-as-a-second-language/","Get the Degree You Need to Help ESL Students Achieve More
You may have noticed that the demographics of America’s classrooms are changing. There is an increasing number of young people growing up in households that don’t speak English. Since our school system revolves entirely around the English language, this means more children are entering our schools at a disadvantage. If you feel passionate about reaching these students and helping them develop their English language skills, we have the degree for you.
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Education in English as a Second Language (ESL) provides the education courses, hands-on classroom experience, and support system you’ll need to become a licensed teacher. Teaching ESL students is a rewarding career path that gives you the chance to learn about new cultures while sharing your own.
Whether your dream is to work with students in the United States or to travel and teach abroad, our 100% online B.Ed. program is the degree you’ll need.
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor of Education Program?
Liberty’s unique licensure-track B.Ed. programs provide 100% online, Virginia Department of Education (VDOE) approved courses. With hands-on experience through student teaching and practicums in a classroom near you, you can learn to apply teaching theory to real-world problems.
With Liberty’s mission to Train Champions for Christ, you can be confident that you’ll study under dedicated professors who teach from a biblical worldview and are passionate about building up teachers who pursue excellence and Christ-like compassion. Our faculty have years of experience in their fields and will help you learn how to seamlessly integrate biblical principles into your profession.
Designed to provide maximum flexibility and convenience as a fully online program, our bachelor’s degree in English as a second language education for P-12 students can give you the foundation you need to thrive as a teacher — without ever having to travel to a university campus.
What Will You Learn in Our English as a Second Language Degree?
Liberty’s B.Ed. in English as a Second Language is broken down into 4 major components: education courses, practicum and gate courses, secondary courses, and student teaching. Your education courses explore the major aspects any teacher has to learn, such as evaluating student learning, creating curriculums, and determining behavioral and individual differences between students.
With a focus in English as a second language, your secondary courses will explore topics ranging from modern grammar and etymology to linguistics, world languages, and second language acquisition. The practicum and student teaching courses will then put your knowledge to the test. You’ll work in the classroom alongside a licensed teacher to see how the principles you’ve learned apply in the real world.
Featured Courses
ENGL 333 – Modern Grammar 
LING 301 – Introduction to Linguistics 
LING 453 – World Languages 
TESL 403 – Second Language Acquisition
Highlights of Our B.Ed. Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field. 
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 6 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Graduate with licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia. 
Complete 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation. 
Observe and teach in a variety of school settings with your required practicum and student teaching hours. 
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/exercise-science/fitness-specialist/","Residential Fitness Specialist Program (B.S.)
Prepare for your future career with a Bachelor of Science in Exercise Science: Fitness Specialist from Liberty University. Learn how to help people of all ages and fitness levels improve their health through exercise interventions. Gain experience creating individual exercise programs that account for chronic medical conditions and performing health-related physical fitness and exercise testing.
Study under professors who are grounded in their Christian worldview and are available to mentor, guide, and support their students throughout their academic journey. Enhance your degree by sitting for certification exams and completing a hands-on internship that will help you obtain future employment.
Topics you will study:
Exercise physiology
Biomechanics
Exercise prescription
Exercise leadership
Sports nutrition
Academic Information for the B.S. in Exercise Science: Fitness Specialist
Featured Fitness Specialist Courses
Physical Fitness (PHED 101)
Group Exercise Instruction (EXSC 315)
PHED Activity Course
Exercise Prescription (EXSC 460)
Start Your Career in Exercise Science
Career Opportunities for Fitness Specialist Program Graduates
Exercise Physiologist
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Fitness Specialist
Fitness/Wellness Center Manager
Corporate/Employee Fitness Director
Personal Trainer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/exercise-science/strength-and-conditioning/","Residential Strength & Conditioning Specialist Program (B.S.)
Enhance your future career with a Bachelor of Science in Exercise Science: Strength and Conditioning Specialist degree from Liberty University. Prepare to work in recreational and official settings boosting athletic performance in individuals. Learn how to conduct a needs analysis and develop regimens that cater to the unique needs of individuals as you prepare them for competitions. Practice translating foundational knowledge into practical settings, as you focus on exercise technique, testing and evaluation, exercise selections, and programming.
Study with highly qualified professors who are grounded in their biblical worldview, and passionate about mentoring, guiding, and supporting their students throughout their academic journeys. Gain valuable hands-on experience inside and outside the classroom that will leave you ready to make an impact in your career.
Topics you will study:
Anatomy
Physiology
Human movement
Academic Information for the B.S. in Exercise Science: Strength & Conditioning
Featured Strength & Conditioning Course
Weight Training and Conditioning (PHED 225)
Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning (EXSC 340)
Applied Strength and Conditioning (EXSC 345)
Programming and Periodization for Strength and Conditioning (EXSC 440)
Seminar in Strength and Conditioning (EXSC 401)
Strength and Conditioning Specialist and Workshop Certification (EXSC 486)
Start Your Career in Exercise Science
Career Opportunities for Strength and Conditioning Program Graduates
Strength and Conditioning Coach (school-based)
Strength and Conditioning Coach (private sector)
Sports Scientist
Tactical Strength and Conditioning Coach
Performance Enhancement Specialist
Personal Trainer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/exercise-science/therapeutic-science/","Residential Therapeutic Science Program (B.S.)
Develop the skills you need for your future career with a Bachelor of Science in Exercise Science: Therapeutic Science degree from Liberty University. Gain knowledge and skills foundational to your graduate studies and future allied health career. Develop practical skills like injury assessment and research health-related topics as you learn about complex topics, like clinical musculoskeletal anatomy, and theories of therapeutic rehabilitation.
Study under professors who have years of practical and academic experience in their field, and who are grounded in their Christian worldview. Practice using specialized equipment in the Human Performance, Biomechanics, and Functional Assessment Labs, as you gain real-world experience inside the classroom.
Topics you will study:
Exercise physiology
Biomechanics
Exercise prescription
Exercise leadership
Sports Nutrition
Academic Information for the B.S. in Exercise Science: Therapeutic Science
Featured Therapeutic Science Courses
ATTR 330 Clinical Musculoskeletal Anatomy & Function
ATTR 331 Clinical Musculoskeletal Anatomy Lab
ATTR 335 Musculoskeletal Injury Assessment
ATTR 336 Musculoskeletal Injury Assessment Lab
ATTR 406 Corrective Exercises & Rehabilitation Theory
ATTR 425 Healthcare Evidenced-Based Research Analysis
Start Your Career in Exercise Science
Career Opportunities for Therapeutic Science Program Graduates*
Physician (D.O., M.D.)
Physician Assistant (P.A.)
Physical Therapist (D.P.T.)
Athletic Trainer (L.A.T.)
Occupational Therapist (D.O.T.)
Chiropractor (D.C.)
Registered Dietician (R.D.)
Prosthetist
*Additional education is required for these professions. See what Master’s Degrees Allied Health Professions offers and the Liberty Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine, DO Degree."
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/family-and-consumer-sciences/event-planning/","Residential Event Planning Degree Program
Train to manage diverse events from corporate meetings and conferences to smaller social functions with a Bachelor of Science in Family and Consumer Sciences degree and Event Planning concentration. Uniquely holistic in its approach, the Event Planning cognate combines multiple areas of studies into one. These include:
Business
Event design
Digital promotion
Photography
Event management
Wedding and conference management
Event catering and hospitality
Learn from experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith. Get a biblical worldview on the event planning industry and enter with the knowledge, values, and skills you’ll need to excel in the field and make a positive impact on your community. With this degree, you’ll also participate in an internship where you will gain specific on-the-job skills.
Start building a network of industry professionals by joining the Event Planning Society.
This degree is offered through the Department of Family & Consumer Sciences.
Academic Information – BS in Family & Consumer Sciences: Event Planning
Event Planning Courses You Could Take
Digital Photography (ARTS 361)
Special Events Management (EMGT 320)
Event Management (FACS 351)
Wedding & Event Planning (FACS 355)
Event Catering (FACS 435)
Start Your Career in Event Planning
Career Opportunities for Event Planning Degree Graduates
Event Planner
Wedding Planner
Event Space or Venue Manager
Exhibition Coordinator
Event Planner for Trade Shows & Institutions
Health Services Event Planner
Party Planner
Donor or Sponsorship Coordinator
Catering Services Manager
Event Social Media Coordinator
Staff or Volunteer Coordinator
Marketing or Communications Manager
Program Coordinator
Project Manager"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/family-and-consumer-sciences/professional-and-creative-industries/","Residential Professional and Creative Industries Program
Ready to create an independent business and enjoy the flexibility of a sole proprietor’s schedule? With a B.S. in Family and Consumer Sciences: Professional and Creative Industries concentration, you’ll learn about the many small business opportunities for clothing, textiles, and interiors. You will also gain online business techniques for selling unique items, bespoke goods, and specialized services.
Benefit from a detailed study of various market categories along with an analysis of materials, product design, as well as the historical and contemporary review of merchandising techniques for specialized markets.
Learn from experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith. Courses, taught from a biblical worldview, will give you the holistic training you need in business, writing methods, social media, as well as design and construction.
This degree is offered through the Department of Family & Consumer Sciences.
Academic Information for the BS in Family & Consumer Sciences: Professional and Creative Industries
Professional and Creative Industries Courses You Could Take
Specialty Markets (FACS 324)
Design & Construction I for Apparel (FACS 222)
Retail Merchandising (FACS 353)
Social Media Writing (JOUR 356)
Mobile & Interactive Technology Applications (ARTS 319)
Start Your Career in the Professional & Creative Industries
Career Opportunities for FACS Professional & Creative Industries Degree Graduates
E-commerce of handcrafted items
Social Media Specialist
Creative Entrepreneur 
PR Manager
Fashion & Apparel Assistant
Web Design Project Manager
Creative Communications Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/family-consumer-sciences/","Residential Bachelor of Education in Family and Consumer Sciences Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Licensure
Confidently teach young learners with a Bachelor of Education in Family and Consumer Sciences Education, Grades 6-12 degree. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses in Family and Consumer Sciences (FACS) education. Our education methods classes are designed to give you the tools to meet the needs of every learner. You’ll learn how to utilize the strengths all students bring to the classroom. In-field classroom experiences throughout the program will allow you to put the theory you learn into practice. Classes in parenting, interior design, and career planning will prepare you to teach these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in FACS education. Liberty faculty will show you how to view teaching through a biblical worldview. You’ll be ready to make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Family and Consumer Sciences Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about the contemporary family and want to help learners develop the same zeal. This degree will allow you to begin a career in Family and Consumer Sciences Education. You’ll have the opportunity to gain state licensure and the qualifications needed to teach students at the middle or high school level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Family and Consumer Sciences Education Courses
Development of Contemporary Families (FACS 205)
Design and Construction I for Interiors (FACS 221)
Human Nutrition (FACS 330)
Family Economic Decisions (FACS 350)
Parenting (FACS 370)
Career Opportunities in FACS Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach Family and Consumer Sciences Education in grades 6-12.
Secondary Family and Consumer Sciences (FACS) School Teacher
K-12 Education Consultant
K-12 Curriculum Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/fashion/design/","Residential Fashion Design Degree Program (B.S.)
Prepare for success in the multi-billion-dollar fashion apparel industry with your B.S. in Fashion and Fashion Design cognate from Liberty University. Work in the exciting fields of apparel and accessory design or venture into the entertainment industry as a costume design for theater, television, or film.
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Our professors are degreed in fashion education and clothing and textiles. They continue in their profession through conferences, workshops, and working in the industry.
Get ready for your fashion career through inspiring courses, an internship, and opportunities like a fashion show and fashion tour. Build your professional skills and network with the Fashion Design & Merchandising Association. Through your degree, you’ll:
Learn how to evaluate fibers and fabrics for their intended use
Communicate as a marketer and merchandiser in the business world
Apply professional skills in designing and constructing fashion apparel
Create/produce a sewing construction samples portfolio using standard sewing construction techniques
Develop a professional portfolio of creative fashion design
Illustrate fashion by hand and by using computer software
Design fashion and fabric using computer software
Design fashion apparel by flat-pattern and draping techniques
Gain hands-on experience through our Fashion Design Lab featuring:
sewing machines
industrial straight sewer
industrial hemmer
sergers
industrial overlock
embroidery machine
full-scale draping forms
fabric design software
half-scale draping forms for design
This degree is offered through the Department of Family & Consumer Sciences.
Academic Information for the B.S. in Fashion: Fashion Design
Fashion Design Degree Courses You Could Take
Design & Construction I for Apparel (FACS 222)
Draping for Apparel Design (FACS 422)
Fashion & Textile Design with Computers (FACS 329)
Apparel Illustration and Design (FACS 420)
History of Costume (FACS 429)
Start Your Career in Fashion Design
Career Opportunities for Fashion Design Degree Graduates
Freelance Apparel Designer
Designer’s Assistant
Alterations Specialist
Fashion Accessory Designer
Personal Stylist
Costume Designer
Fashion Illustrator
Fabric Designer
Draper for Design"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/fashion/merchandising/","Residential Fashion Merchandising Degree Program (B.S.)
Are you business-minded with an overwhelming passion for fashion?
If so, our B.S. in Fashion and Fashion Merchandising cognate will prepare you to step into the global fashion industry. Here’s where fashion designers, manufacturers, merchandisers, and retailers from all over the world collaborate to design, manufacture, and sell clothing, shoes, and accessories. With this fashion degree from Liberty University, you’ll gain skills in business, fashion design, and aesthetics. Learn the design stages in the creative process, apply best practices of business and merchandising in your field, and create artifacts that can be leveraged into career opportunities.
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Our professors are degreed in fashion education and clothing and textiles and continue in their profession through conferences, workshops, and working in the industry.
Get ready for your fashion merchandising career through inspiring courses, an internship, and opportunities like a fashion show, pop-up shops, and fashion tour. Build your professional skills and network through the Fashion Design & Merchandising Association. Also, you’ll gain hands-on experience through our Fashion Design Lab featuring:
sewing machines
industrial straight sewer
industrial hemmer
sergers
industrial overlock
embroidery machine
full-scale draping forms
fabric design software
half-scale draping forms for design
The Fashion Lecture/ Lab classroom also provides space for testing materials, lectures, presentations, and collaborative working space for students.
This degree is offered through the Department of Family & Consumer Sciences.
Academic Information for the B.S. in Fashion: Fashion Merchandising
Fashion Merchandising Degree Courses You Could Take
Introduction to the Fashion Industry (FACS 225)
Special Fashion Markets (FACS 324)
Psycho-Social Aspects of Clothing (FACS 325)
Retail Merchandising (FACS 353)
Fashion Promotion & Visual Merchandising (FACS 423)
Start Your Career in Fashion Merchandising
Career Opportunities for Fashion Merchandising Degree Graduates
Fashion Boutique Owner
Visual Merchandiser
Fashion Stylist
Fashion Merchandiser
Accessory Merchandiser
Fashion Show Production
Apparel Manufacturers Representative"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/fashion/","B.S. in Fashion
Residential B.S. in Fashion Program
Customize your Bachelor of Science in Fashion degree from Liberty University with a concentration in either Fashion Merchandising or Fashion Design.
Prepare for the fashion apparel industry in product development, management, merchandising, and distribution with our Fashion Merchandising concentration. Create unique designs and gain the skills you need for success in your career with our Fashion Design concentration. Get a biblical perspective on the fashion industry from skilled professors who are grounded in their faith.
This degree is offered through the Department of Family & Consumer Sciences.
Academic Information for the Fashion Major
Fashion Courses You Could Take
Design and Construction I Apparel (FACS 222)
Textiles: Fibers and Fabrics (FACS 320)
Apparel Illustration and Design (FACS 420)
Fashion Promotion and Visual Merchandising (FACS 423)
View Testimonials
Start Your Career in Fashion
Career Opportunities for Fashion Majors
Fashion Merchandising Focus:
Fashion Related Management
E-Commerce Site Merchandiser
Assistant/Associate Fashion Buyer
Display and Visual Merchandising
Fashion Show Director
Boutique Owner
Fashion Design Focus:
Fashion Designer
Fashion Design Assistant
Pattern Maker
Sample Maker
Fashion Accessories Design
Stylist"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/fashion-merchandising/creative-design/","Design and Sell Your Fashion Creations with a Creative Design Degree
Everyone has ideas, but it takes genuinely creative designers to make breakthroughs that change their industries. If you want to make a splash with your own fashion ideas, you can learn how to apply your talents and knowledge to become a fashion designer. Liberty University’s 100% online B.S. in Fashion Merchandising – Creative Design can help you gain the background, skills, and business knowledge you need to take the fashion world by storm.
With a creative design degree in fashion merchandising, you can develop your creative skills while gaining the practical tools needed to shine in this competitive industry. You can design fashions based on your knowledge of historical trends and innovative ideas through a practical design process. With the skills you learn in this degree, you can develop new products or costumes for creative projects. You can use your expertise to work as a merchandiser or manager in high fashion stores and boutiques. Or you could even be a stylist for high-end clientele like celebrities and politicians.
The fashion industry needs people like you who are excited and passionate about the field. With hands-on experience in your entrepreneurial internship, you can apply what you learn to the world of fashion design. Our degree in fashion merchandising can help you obtain all the skills you need to be a successful fashion professional.
Why Choose Liberty’s Fashion Merchandising Degree?
When you choose to earn your degree from Liberty University, you’ll be studying with confidence. You’ll know that you’re getting real-life experience, courses that meet accreditation requirements, and professional faculty members who partner with you for success. With the creative design, business, and marketing skills you’ll learn in this degree, you can do more than just design fashion products. You can help get these creative products into the hands of excited consumers.
Our professors are professionals in the fashion field with years of experience and degrees in related areas. They’re excited about the opportunity to mentor, guide, and teach you throughout your academic journey with us.
Plus, with our flexible online format, you can earn your degree without having to come to a physical campus. But studying online doesn’t mean losing in-person training. In this degree, you’ll complete an internship in your area that will give you the real-world experience you need to be career-ready upon graduation. With a flexible course format and hands-on experience, you can be ready to enter the field confidently.
What Will You Learn in Our Fashion Merchandising Degree?
Liberty’s bachelor’s degree in fashion merchandising – creative design provides the training you need to help you succeed in a career as a fashion designer and business professional. You will take foundational courses that are essential to understanding the basics of fashion and the business and management side of the industry.
Along with practical industry courses, you will also gain exposure to fashion design history, several art classes to help you create illustrations, and an applied drafting course that can help you make professional designs. These courses can help equip you to be an entrepreneur in the creative design industry.
With the required internship and capstone at the end of the program, you will have the opportunity to gain hands-on experience and demonstrate your expertise. These courses will help establish you as an expert and give you the background you need to break into the fashion industry.
View the Degree Completion Plan, and check out our featured courses below for more information!
Featured Courses
ARTS 113 – Introduction to 2D Design
ARTS 114 – Introduction to 3D Design
FACS 244 – Applied Drafting for Interiors*
HIST 309 – Historic Fashion and Design
*Course guide coming soon
Highlights of Our B.S. in Fashion Merchandising – Creative Design
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online fashion design degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Gain hands-on experience and potential job opportunities through a required fashion design internship.
Show your skills and impress future employers with your capstone project."
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/family-and-child-development/","Residential Program in Family and Child Development
Support families and individuals by developing the values and skills you’ll need to be an advocate for your clients. Learn how to strengthen the function of the family from a biblical perspective.
With Liberty’s Family & Child Development B.S. degree, you’ll gain an understanding of human development and family studies that will help you become a leader in your field.
Opportunities include:
Observation hours at local preschools
Virtual observation of a support group
Local field trips
Hands-on classroom experience
Theories
Guest speakers from child and family-focused professions – ministry, special needs, foster care & adoption services, preschool, mental and behavioral health services, community non-profits, public policy.
Capstone course where you will develop a professional portfolio and research with the biblical worldview
Internship related to family and child development
Gain networking and service opportunities in the Family & Child Development Association
View Testimonial
This degree is offered through the Department of Family & Consumer Science.
Academic Information – B.S. in Family & Child Development
Family and Child Development Courses You Could Take
Development of Contemporary Families (FACS 205)
Early Childhood Education (FACS 260)
Therapy and Theory of Play in Early Childhood (FACS 361)
Administration of Family and Child Life Programs (FACS 365)
Parenting (FACS 370)
Families Under Stress (FACS 475)
Start Your Career in Family & Child Development
Career Opportunities for Family & Child Development Degree Graduates
Child Advocate
Pregnancy Centers
Group Homes
Family Preservation
Adult Care
Children’s Ministry
Case Worker
Child Life Specialist"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/fashion-merchandising/fashion-writing/","Help Fans Follow the Latest Trends with a Fashion Writing Degree
The fashion industry moves fast, changing trends quickly as new ideas enter the scene. Fashion fans and businesses need help keeping track of the latest products and new lines. Liberty University’s 100% online B.S. in Fashion Merchandising – Fashion Writing can help you gain the background, skills, and business knowledge you need to report on the fashion industry and bring your ideas to the fans.
With a fashion writing degree in fashion merchandising, you can connect with audiences through fashion blogs, articles, and social media. You can critique new trends and report on the biggest stories of the season, all while developing your own designs and business. With the skills you learn in this degree, you can build your platform through a blog and social media presence. You can use your expertise as a fashion critic to work as a merchandiser or manager in high fashion stores and boutiques. Or you could even write for some of the most prominent magazines and sites in the industry.
The fashion industry needs people like you who are excited and passionate about the field. With hands-on experience in your entrepreneurial internship, you can apply what you learn to the real world of fashion journalism. Our degree in fashion merchandising can help you obtain all the skills you need to be a successful fashion professional.
Why Choose Liberty’s Fashion Merchandising Degree?
When you choose to earn your degree from Liberty University, you’ll be studying with confidence. You’ll know that you’re getting real-life experience, courses that meet accreditation requirements, and professional faculty members who partner with you for success. With the fashion writing, business, and marketing skills you’ll learn in this degree, you can do more than just design fashion products – you can help fashion fans and industry professionals understand the latest happenings.
Our professors are professionals in the fashion field with years of experience and degrees in related areas. They’re excited about the opportunity to mentor, guide, and teach you throughout your academic journey.
Plus, with our flexible online format, you can earn your degree without having to come to a physical campus. But studying online doesn’t mean losing in-person training. In this degree, you’ll complete an internship in your area that will give you the real-world experience you need to be career-ready upon graduation so you can enter your profession confidently.
What Will You Learn in Our Fashion Writing Degree?
Liberty’s bachelor’s degree in fashion merchandising – fashion writing provides the training you need to help you succeed in a career as a fashion journalist and business professional. You will take foundational courses essential to understanding the basics of fashion and the business and management side of the industry.
Building on this fashion business foundation, you will also study journalism and social media so that you can use your knowledge to communicate effectively. With a specialized study in fashion history and fashion writing, you can learn how to be a digital entrepreneur in the fashion industry.
With the required internship and capstone at the end of the program, you will have the opportunity to gain hands-on experience and demonstrate your expertise. These courses will help establish you as an expert and give you the background you need to break into the fashion writing industry.
Featured Courses
HIST 309 – Historic Fashion and Design
JOUR 225 – Media Writing
JOUR 356 – Social Media Writing
WRIT 405 – Fashion Writing*
*Course guide coming soon
Highlights of Our B.S. in Fashion Merchandising – Fashion Writing
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online fashion writing degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Tuition for all undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs has not increased in 8 years. While many other online colleges have raised tuition, Liberty has been able to keep costs low as a nonprofit university.
Gain hands-on experience and potential job opportunities through a required fashion writing internship.
Show your skills and impress future employers with your capstone project."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/fashion-merchandising/","Make Your Mark on the Fashion Industry with Liberty’s Online Bachelor’s in Fashion Merchandising
Do you want to reach the fashion industry with your creative ideas? At Liberty University, you can earn your Bachelor of Science in Fashion Merchandising degree online to get the knowledge, skills, and experience you need to pursue a career in the world of fashion.
With a degree in fashion merchandising, you can develop your creative skills while gaining the practical tools needed to shine in this competitive industry. With the training you receive in this degree, you could use your expertise to work as a merchandiser or manager in high fashion stores and boutiques. You can help businesses give their customers the most exciting, cutting-edge products. Or you could even be a stylist for high-end clientele like celebrities and politicians. The possibilities are endless.
The fashion industry needs people like you who are excited and passionate about the field. Our degree in fashion merchandising can help you obtain the tools you need to be a successful fashion professional.
Why Choose Liberty University’s Fashion Merchandising Degree?
When you choose to earn your degree from Liberty University, you can study with confidence. You’ll know that you’re getting real-life experience, courses that meet accreditation requirements, and professional faculty members who partner with you for success. With the merchandising, marketing, and fashion skills you’ll learn in this degree, you can do more than just design fashion products – you can help get these creative products into the hands of avid consumers.
Our professors are professionals in the fashion field with years of experience and degrees in related areas. They’re excited about the opportunity to mentor, guide, and teach you throughout your academic journey with us.
Plus, with our flexible online fashion merchandising degree, you can learn the skills you need without commuting to a physical campus. But studying online doesn’t mean losing in-person training. In this degree, you’ll complete an internship in your area that can help give you the real-world experience you need to be career-ready upon graduation. With a flexible course format and hands-on experience, you can prepare to enter the field with confidence.
What Will You Learn in Our Fashion Merchandising Degree?
Liberty’s fashion merchandising online courses can help provide the training you need to pursue a fashion merchandising career. You will take foundational courses that are essential to understanding the basics of fashion as well as the business and management side of the industry.
Through this program, you will study fashion design, practical family and consumer science, and general education content. You will also gain a foundation in business that can help you succeed in the fashion industry. You’ll learn about marketing, economics, and psychology in the fashion industry. You’ll also take courses that will teach you how to use software and tools needed for design.
With the required internship and capstone at the end of the program, you will have the opportunity to gain hands-on experience and demonstrate your expertise. These courses can help establish you as an expert and help give you the background you need to break into the fashion industry.
Featured Courses
FACS 243 – Digital Drafting I
FACS 301 – Elements of Fabric*
FACS 303 – Fashion Industries and Markets*
FACS 353 – Retail Merchandising
*Course guide coming soon
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/family-and-consumer-sciences/","Residential Program in Family and Consumer Sciences
The Bachelor of Science in Family and Consumer Sciences (FACS) residential program seeks to strengthen the individual, institution of family, and communities through the dissemination of biblical knowledge and the education of professionals. This program includes family and child development, clothing, interiors, consumer economics, and event planning.
This degree is offered through the Department of Family & Consumer Sciences.
View Testimonial
Teach Family & Consumer Sciences with Your B.Ed. Degree
Turn your passion for family and consumer sciences into a fulfilling teaching career. With a Bachelor of Education (B.Ed) degree in Family & Consumer Sciences Education 6-12, you can get the licensure you need to teach in this field.
Learn more about the B.Ed.
Academic Information – B.S. in Family & Consumer Sciences
Courses You Could Take
Foundations of Event Planning (FACS 202)
Specialty Markets (FACS 324)
Family Economic Decisions (FACS 350)
Event Management (FACS 351)
Career Planning (FACS 381)
FACS Internship (FACS 499)
Start Your Career in Family & Consumer Sciences
Career Opportunities
FACS – Professional and Creative Industries
E-commerce of handcrafted products
Virtual Assistant
Consulting Business
Social Media Specialist
FACS – Event Planning
Marketing or Communications Manager
Wedding Planner
Donor or Sponsorship Coordinator
Event Coordinator
Activities Director
Children or Youth Ministry
Extension Agent
4-H or Extension Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/bfa-film-production-creative-development/","Launch Your Film Career with the Residential B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development
Get ready for success in the film industry with a B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development from Liberty University. This professional degree program offers you a unique Christ-centered, story-centric film production experience. Be mentored by award-winning industry professionals using world-class production facilities. Our faculty members give you specialized, hands-on instruction in taking a story from concept to distribution.
Learn how to integrate your faith into all aspects of film production while you gain an understanding of:
Story development
Film pre-production
Production
Post-production
Distribution
Media law
Marketing
With your film B.F.A., you’ll be prepared to perform well on any film set. As a student, you’ll work as crew on a feature-film-level production produced for distribution. Our graduates receive up to two IMDb (International Movie Database) credits from crewing these films.
As a student, you’ll have access to Liberty University’s state-of-the-art production facilities and equipment to use for your thesis film. These include a certified THX Dubbing Studio, the DaVinci Resolve Coloring Suite, Wet Foley Recording Room, RED Epic Helium 8K cameras, ARRI HMI lights, Litepanels, and a robust wardrobe and props inventory.
The B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development is offered through the Cinematic Arts Department.
Why Get a BFA in Film Production?
Our BFA is a professional degree that allows you to gain skills in targeted focus areas while giving you practice in real-world film productions. With the BFA in Film Production & Creative Development degree from Liberty University, you’ll get the experience and preparation needed to walk onto any film set and perform with excellence.
Start Your Journey in Film Production & Creative Development
Customize Your Degree in One of the Disciplines of Filmmaking Below
Producing
Build and manage a team of creative storytellers. From story concept to delivery and revenue streams, as a producer, you’ll learn how to lead the process of content development.
Interested in learning more?
Explore our Producing Media cognate
Screenwriting
Discover your voice and write for the big and small screen. Find out how to craft stories filled with engaging characters that produce a relatable message.
Interested in learning more?
Explore our Storytelling cognate
Cinematography
Connect viewers to the story and shape their perspective. As a cinematographer, you’ll learn how to reveal a story’s truths and emotions through your use of the camera.
Interested in learning more?
Explore our Visual Arts cognate
Production Design
Develop an eye for visual storytelling that provides context, continuity, meaning, and character to a multi-media narrative. As a production designer, your set, location, and prop aesthetics will create a stage for the story.
Interested in learning more?
Explore our Visual Arts cognate
Directing
Bring stories to life as you grow in your understanding of cinematic craft. Learn how to motivate a cast and crew to fulfill your visions and make masterpieces.
Interested in learning more?
Explore our Storytelling cognate
Sound Design
Acquire the skills to emotionally move an audience in ways that images cannot—ways that may even be subconscious to viewers. Learn how to listen to a movie and create sounds that will interpret a story.
Interested in learning more?
Explore our Sound Design cognate
Editing
Gain a deep understanding of story elements and a mastery of the technology that can edit and deliver them as narrative works of art. Learn postproduction roles such as picture editing, visual effects, and sound mixing.
Interested in learning more?
Explore our Storytelling cognate
Showrunning
Great television series start with a pitch from a showrunner. Discover how to take a television series from an idea to a series and guide a story’s development through multiple episodes.
Interested in learning more?
Explore our Producing Media cognate
Visual Effects
Churches, corporations, the government, and non-profits need someone to create, manage, and deliver audio/visual content. Learn how to manage productions and create engaging content while informing targeted viewers.
Interested in learning more?
Explore our Visual Arts cognate
Don’t See What You’re Looking For?
Gain even more flexibility as you handpick classes that align with your interests and career goals.
Learn about our BFA in Film Production & Creative Development – Interdisciplinary degree.
Follow @libertyucinema on Instagram
This error message is only visible to WordPress admins
Error: There is no connected account for the user libertyucinema."
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/film-production-content-development/","Residential Degree in Film Production & Content Development
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Film Production and Content Development program in the Cinematic Arts Department prepares students for success in the film industry by providing hands-on experience with industry-standard equipment, world-class facilities, and experience working under professors who are experts in the field.
Our mission is to train the next generation of storytellers who have a passion for film and a desire to share life-changing messages with the world.
Academic Information for the Film Production & Content Development Major
Courses You Could Take
Intro. to Screenwriting (CINE 201)
Advanced Audio Production (CINE 454)
Intro. to Cinematography (CINE 203)
Producing and Directing (CINE 303)
Start Your Career 
Career Opportunities for Film Production & Content Development Majors
Producer
Director
Screenwriter
Editor
Sound Effects Editor
Sound Mixer
Multimedia Artist
Cinematographer
Animator
Marketing Manager
Promotion Manager
Corporate Media Creator
Church Media Creator
Content Developer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/bfa-film-production-creative-development/interdisciplinary/","Residential B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development – Interdisciplinary
Equip yourself for an exciting film career with a Film Production & Creative Development (B.F.A.) – Interdisciplinary degree from Liberty University. Learn how to integrate your faith into all aspects of film production as you prepare for a wide range of film production opportunities. Gain hands-on experience working with other students in our cohort-based program. Collaborate on classroom projects, and apply the concepts you learn in real-world film production settings.
Learn from highly trained professors who are grounded in their Christian worldview, and dedicated to your success. In addition to their teaching responsibilities, all faculty are working professionals in their area of expertise.
This cognate gives you the flexibility to choose classes that align with your interests and career goals. Choose courses from three of the following areas to specialize in:
Cinematography
Directing
Screenwriting
Producing
Showrunning
Special Effects
Sound Design
Editing
Production Design
Film Production students have access to Liberty University’s state-of-the-art production facilities and equipment to use for their thesis films. This includes a certified THX Dubbing Studio, the DaVinci Resolve Coloring Suite, Wet Foley Recording Room, RED Epic Helium 8K cameras, ARRI HMI lights, Litepanels, and a robust wardrobe and props inventory.
Additional Cognates Offered With This BFA Degree
The B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development is offered through the Cinematic Arts Department. Other degree cognates include:
Visual Arts
Producing Media
Storytelling
Sound Design
Why Get a BFA in Film Production?
Our BFA is a professional degree that allows you to gain skills in targeted focus areas while giving you practice in real-world film productions. With the BFA in Film Production & Creative Development degree from Liberty University, you’ll get the experience and preparation needed to walk onto any film set and perform with excellence.
Academics for the B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development – Interdisciplinary
Featured Interdisciplinary Courses
Pro Tools Production II (CINE 371)
Movie Stunts and Action for Camera (CINE 390)
Advanced Editing and Color Correction in DaVinci Resolve (CINE 385)
The Director/Actor Process and Workshop (CINE 470)
Showrunning a TV Series: The Writing Process (CINE 477)
Ready for an Exciting Film Career?
Film Production & Creative Development Career Opportunities
Producer
Director
Screenwriter
Director of Photography
Church Media Director
Editor
VFX Artist
Sound Designer
Production Designer
TV Showrunner"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/bfa-film-production-creative-development/sound-design/","Residential B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development: Sound Design
Develop the skills you need for success as a sound designer with a degree in Film Production & Creative Development (B.F.A.): Sound Design from Liberty University. Equip yourself with knowledge of soundscape development, on-set sound recording, and sound editing and mixing for narrative film. Study sound design principles and get experience using our state-of-the-art, on-set recording gear. Gain skills in understanding dialogue and music editing as well as Foley production. You will also become familiar with Pro-Tools and other post-production sound software.
Gain hands-on experience working with other students in our cohort-based program. Collaborate on classroom projects and apply the concepts you learn in real-world film production settings.
Learn from highly trained professors grounded in their Christian worldview and dedicated to your success. In addition to their teaching responsibilities, all faculty are working professionals in their area of expertise.
Film Production students have access to Liberty University’s state-of-the-art production facilities and equipment to use for their thesis films. This includes a certified THX Dubbing Studio, the DaVinci Resolve Coloring Suite, Wet Foley Recording Room, RED Epic Helium 8K cameras, ARRI HMI lights, Litepanels, and a robust wardrobe and props inventory.
Additional Cognates Offered With This BFA Degree
The B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development is offered through the Cinematic Arts Department. Other degree cognates include:
Visual Arts
Producing Media
Storytelling
Interdisciplinary
Why Get a BFA in Film Production?
Our BFA is a professional degree that allows you to gain skills in targeted focus areas while giving you practice in real-world film productions. With the BFA in Film Production & Creative Development degree from Liberty University, you’ll get the experience and preparation needed to walk onto any film set and perform with excellence.
Academics for the B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development: Sound Design
Featured Sound Design Courses
Pro Tools Fundamentals I (CINE 271)
Production Sound (CINE 354)
Post-Production Sound (CINE 454)
Audio Post-Production Practicum (CINE 474)
Get Ready for Your Film Career in Sound Design
Sound Design Career Opportunities
Sound Designer
Sound Recordist
Boom Operator
Film Sound Mixer
Dialogue Editor
Foley Recordist
Post-Production Sound Supervisor"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/bfa-film-production-creative-development/producing-media/","Residential B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development: Producing Media 
Prepare yourself for a successful film career with a Film Production & Creative Development (B.F.A.): Producing Media degree from Liberty University. Study the concepts and practices you will need as a producer of digital video content. Develop skills in aesthetic story development, film production management, showrunning, and line producing, as well as scheduling and budgeting productions.
Gain hands-on experience working with other students in our cohort-based program. Collaborate on classroom projects and apply the concepts you learn in real-world film production settings.
Learn from highly trained professors who are grounded in their Christian worldview and dedicated to your success. In addition to their teaching responsibilities, all faculty are working professionals in their area of expertise.
Film Production students have access to Liberty University’s state-of-the-art production facilities and equipment to use for their thesis films. These include a certified THX Dubbing Studio, the DaVinci Resolve Coloring Suite, Wet Foley Recording Room, RED Epic Helium 8K cameras, ARRI HMI lights, Litepanels, and a robust wardrobe and props inventory.
Additional Cognates Offered With This BFA Degree
The B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development is offered through the Cinematic Arts Department. Other degree cognates include:
Visual Arts
Storytelling
Sound Design
Interdisciplinary
Why Get a BFA in Film Production?
Our BFA is a professional degree that allows you to gain skills in targeted focus areas while giving you practice in real-world film productions. With the BFA in Film Production & Creative Development degree from Liberty University, you’ll get the experience and preparation needed to walk onto any film set and perform with excellence.
Academics for the B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development – Producing Media 
Featured Producing Media Courses
Development and Pre-Production (CINE 460)
Scheduling and Budgeting (CINE 461)
Advanced Producing (CINE 462)
Showrunning a TV Series: The Writing Process (CINE 477)
Get Ready for Your Film Career in Producing Media
Producing Media Career Opportunities
Executive Producer
Producer
Line Producer
Showrunner
Production Office Coordinator
First Assistant Director"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/bfa-film-production-creative-development/storytelling/","Residential B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development: Storytelling
Jump-start your film career with a Film Production & Creative Development (B.F.A.): Storytelling degree from Liberty University. Gain the skills necessary to become a successful writer, editor, or director of narrative films. Customize your degree program by choosing one of the focuses offered below:
Directing: Develop your practical skills in directing actors, breaking down a script to develop a vision, and communicating with all departments.
Screenwriting: Learn how to write scripts for short films, feature-length films, film adaptations, and TV series.
Editing: Understand editing theories and gain skills in the application of editing theory as you edit narrative film projects using Adobe Premiere, Media Composer, and Davinci Resolve.
Learn from highly trained professors grounded in their Christian worldview and dedicated to your success. In addition to their teaching responsibilities, all faculty are working professionals in their area of expertise. Gain hands-on experience working with other students in our cohort-based program. Collaborate on classroom projects and apply the concepts you learn in real-world film production settings.
Film Production students have access to Liberty University’s state-of-the-art production facilities and equipment to use for their thesis films. This includes a certified THX Dubbing Studio, the DaVinci Resolve Coloring Suite, Wet Foley Recording Room, RED Epic Helium 8K cameras, ARRI HMI lights, Litepanels, and a robust wardrobe and props inventory.
Additional Cognates Offered With This BFA Degree
The B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development is offered through the Cinematic Arts Department. Other degree cognates include:
Visual Arts
Producing Media
Sound Design
Interdisciplinary
Why Get a BFA in Film Production?
Our BFA is a professional degree that allows you to gain skills in targeted focus areas while giving you practice in real-world film productions. With the BFA in Film Production & Creative Development degree from Liberty University, you’ll get the experience and preparation needed to walk onto any film set and perform with excellence.
Academics for the B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development: Storytelling
Featured Storytelling Courses
Media Composer Fundamentals I (CINE 281)
Feature Screenwriting (CINE 353)
Movie Stunts and Action for Camera (CINE 390)
The Director/Actor Process and Workshop (CINE 470)
Showrunning a TV Series: The Writing Process (CINE 477)
Get Ready for Your Film Career in Storytelling
Storytelling Career Opportunities
Director
Screenwriter
Assistant Editor
Editor
Story Consultant"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/bfa-film-production-creative-development/visual-arts/","Residential B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development: Visual Arts
Master the practical skills you need to become a successful cinematographer, colorist, production designer, or visual effects artist with a Film Production & Creative Development (B.F.A.): Visual Arts degree from Liberty University.
Customize your degree program by choosing one of the focuses offered below:
Cinematography: Learn advanced camera techniques using RED Epic Helium 8K cameras, PeeWee dolly, Steadicam, and Ronin devices. You will also acquire lighting techniques using ARRI HMI lights, Litepanels, and Q-Lion lights.
Production Design: Understand art and design principles and practical skills for set design, costume design, hair and makeup design, as well as props management for the production of narrative films.
Visual Effects: Develop skills specific to the design, production, and editing of visual effects using state-of-the-art production facilities and post-production software such as Autodesk Maya, Cinema 4D, 3D Studio Max, and Adobe After Effects.
Learn from highly trained professors who are grounded in their Christian worldview and dedicated to your success. In addition to their teaching responsibilities, all faculty are working professionals in their area of expertise. Gain hands-on experience working with other students in our cohort-based program. Collaborate on classroom projects and apply the concepts you learn in real-world film production settings.
Film Production students have access to Liberty University’s state-of-the-art production facilities and equipment to use for their thesis films. This includes a certified THX Dubbing Studio, the DaVinci Resolve Coloring Suite, Wet Foley Recording Room, RED Epic Helium 8K cameras, ARRI HMI lights, Litepanels, and a robust wardrobe and props inventory.
Additional Cognates Offered With This BFA Degree
The B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development is offered through the Cinematic Arts Department. Other degree cognates include:
Producing Media
Storytelling
Sound Design
Interdisciplinary
Why Get a BFA in Film Production?
Our BFA is a professional degree that allows you to gain skills in targeted focus areas while giving you practice in real-world film productions. With the BFA in Film Production & Creative Development degree from Liberty University, you’ll get the experience and preparation needed to walk onto any film set and perform with excellence.
Academics for the B.F.A. in Film Production & Creative Development: Visual Arts
Featured Visual Arts Courses
Introduction to 3D Graphics (ART 473)
Psychology of Fashion (FACS 302)
Advanced Editing and Color Correction in DaVinci Resolve (CINE 385)
Advanced Camera Movement (CINE 391)
Advanced Visual Effects Post Production (CINE 395)
Get Ready for Your Film Career in Visual Arts
Visual Arts Career Opportunities
Director of Photography
Production Designer
Colorist
First Assistant Camera
Special Effects Artist
Special Effects Editor"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/fire-administration/emergency-management/","Gain the Skills Needed to Plan for and React to Disasters with Liberty’s Fire Administration and Emergency Management Bachelor’s Degree
Disasters and emergency situations, whether man-made or natural, require planning and coordinating between many agencies within the government and outside of the government. Fire departments and first responders need people like you who are ready to answer the call to coordinate with and guide others in response and recovery efforts. Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Fire Administration – Emergency Management can help equip you with the tools you need to save lives and property.
Through our fire science and emergency management degree, you can broaden your ability to help communities protect against natural and man-made disasters as well as help lead the recovery process. Our emergency management specialization can help you gain a firm grasp on what is needed to coordinate between multiple agencies at all levels of government. Furthermore, our core courses can help prepare you for the leadership challenges you may face, such as budgeting, conflict management, resource allocation, motivating individuals and groups, and more.
Learn to prepare and guard against disasters as well as educate the public on what they can do to protect themselves. For those who live to serve, this firefighter degree can help open more opportunities and show you new ways to make a positive impact in your community and state.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Fire Service Management Degree?
Liberty University’s online fire administration bachelor’s degree is designed to help professional firefighters advance in their careers. Our emergency management specialization can help you gain skills and knowledge that can be instrumental in coordinating with other governmental agencies. By combining these newly found skills with previous training, you can pursue leadership and administrative roles in emergency service organizations. This program can help develop fire administration leaders who understand and accept responsibility for public safety and protection.
As a Christian university, we can identify with service-minded individuals who are working in emergency services. Our courses are taught from a Christian worldview and are aimed at helping you apply similar values to your job that benefit the community. This emergency management degree trains fire administration professionals like you to ethically protect the lives and property of the people they serve.
Juggling academics and professional life might appear intimidating, but it doesn’t have to be. To facilitate your success, we’ve structured a completely online emergency management degree program. Our 8-week courses with no set login times offer you the flexibility to pursue your degree from any part of the globe.
Generous Discount for Active Duty Law Enforcement and Other First Responders
Liberty University is committed to providing world-class education and aims to help students achieve their educational goals in whatever way we can. The First Responder Discount was created to take some of the financial burdens of tuition off the men and women who work in public service.
As Liberty University’s way of saying “Thank you,” we proudly provide you with the following benefits:
A 25% tuition discount
Personalized service throughout your educational journey
Potential college credit for training and life experience
Potential stacking with other tuition benefits (Corporate Advantage Program or military benefits)
For more information on eligibility and claiming this discount, please visit the First Responder Discount page.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Degree in Emergency Management?
In this fire management degree, you will study a wide range of subjects that are applicable to this field, especially when applied to management positions. Your core courses will include techniques for efficient and effective planning, organizing, and leading. You will learn about things like conflict management and how to motivate individuals and groups. From there, you can develop a basic understanding of how to prepare, respond, and recover after emergencies. Your courses will also cover subjects that are specifically geared toward fire service organizations, such as human resource management and administration of these departments.
Our emergency management specialization will focus on how different organizations respond to disasters that are either natural or caused by terrorism. You can learn how to protect critical infrastructure like telecommunications, transportation, energy, water, medical care, emergency services, and much more. You will also explore the principles of emergency services and how to protect the safety of your emergency response personnel.
Your studies will culminate in a capstone course that will require you to demonstrate mastery of the knowledge gained from this emergency services program. You will have the opportunity to choose a topic or issue and then apply what you have learned to address a realistic situation or problem. This can help you gain confidence in your knowledge and skills as you prepare to serve your community.
Featured Courses
CJUS 380 – Introduction to Homeland Security 
CJUS 382 – Critical Infrastructure Protection 
EMER 310 – Principles of Emergency Services 
EMER 330 – Legal Aspects of Emergency Services
Highlights of Our Fire Management Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty graduates are often sought after by prestigious companies for their integrity, personal discipline, and versatility.
You will have access to vast online resources and materials through Liberty’s research portal while completing your fire tech studies."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/fire-administration/fire-science/","Get the Knowledge You Need to Become a Leader in Your Career With Liberty’s Fire Administration – Fire Science Bachelor’s Degree 
Have you been working in the fire science profession for awhile but are ready for a new challenge? Are you ready to combine your years of experience with a college degree to pursue management positions? If so, Liberty’s Bachelor of Science (BS) in Fire Administration – Fire Science degree could help you stand out among your peers and expand your career opportunities. Our undergraduate online fire administration degree provides a comprehensive curriculum, laying a solid foundation in critical areas of fire technology, such as fire prevention, protection systems, fire investigation services, and more. This program allows you to become the knowledgeable leader your community needs. From educating your community about fire prevention and protection to providing emergency medical services, as a fire service professional, you play a vital role in keeping your community safe.
Our online fire administration degree with a specialization in fire science offers a unique blend of managerial and technical skills necessary for leadership roles within the field. As a student, you can learn how to strategically plan, make critical decisions, and manage the complexities of fire and emergency services. This program is designed to create professionals who can effectively mitigate risks and manage crisis situations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Fire Administration – Fire Science Degree?
Our 100% online fire administration bachelor’s degree with a specialization in fire science combines the strength of a robust curriculum, the convenience of online learning, and the foundational principles of biblical education. Our fire administration degree has been meticulously designed to suit the demands and schedules of working professionals like you. At Liberty, you can earn your degree at a pace that works best for you, making it ideal for busy parents or anyone needing a flexible learning schedule.
One of our program’s significant strengths is our faculty’s caliber. Each of our fire science classes is taught by experienced professionals, who offer insights drawn from real-world scenarios. The faculty members in this program are academically qualified and have extensive professional experience in fire science and administration. They bring their firsthand knowledge and insights into the classroom, bridging the gap between theory and practice. Our faculty is committed to mentoring and guiding students like you, ensuring you get the most out of your educational experience.
As a Christian institution, we integrate biblical principles into our curriculum, encouraging students to view their studies and future careers through a Christian worldview. This approach provides a rich, ethical framework for the discipline and equips students to become morally responsible, values-oriented leaders in their fields. By choosing Liberty University’s online BS in Fire Administration – Fire Science degree, you’re not just choosing an education but a pathway that combines professional competency with ethical leadership.
Tuition Discount for Law Enforcement and Other First Responders 
Liberty University is committed to providing world-class education and aims to help students achieve their educational goals in whatever ways we can. The First Responder tuition discount was created to take some of the financial burden off the men and women who work in public service.
As Liberty University’s way of saying “Thank you,” we proudly provide you with the following benefits:
A 25% tuition discount
Personalized service throughout your educational journey
Potential college credit for training and life experience
Potential stacking with other tuition benefits (Corporate Advantage Program or military benefits)
What Will You Learn in Our BS in Fire Administration – Fire Science Online Degree?
By enrolling in Liberty’s fire science degree online, you can delve into an array of essential fire protection subjects. You’ll gain exposure to diverse topics like fire prevention and safety, public education, and building construction. Our program can provide you with the tools to recognize hazards and techniques to effectively prevent fires.
The courses within this program are meticulously designed to allow you to examine and understand fire characteristics and the structural consequences of fire. Particular emphasis is placed on risk assessment and management, specifically in environments where people are assembled and could be endangered by fire.
Furthermore, you can explore the intricacies of the American legal system and its impact on fire service administration. As a student, you can develop a deep understanding of the fire service professional’s legal responsibilities, liabilities, and authorities. The online bachelor’s in fire administration – fire science also includes a wide range of specialized topics, enhancing your understanding and skills in this field. These include fire dynamics, fire-related human behavior, and analytical approaches to public fire protection. You will also have the opportunity to delve into fire investigation and analysis, along with the design of fire protection structures and systems. By engaging with this diverse curriculum, you can build a robust knowledge base, preparing you to effectively face and address the complex challenges in fire science and administration.
Featured Courses
FIRE 350 – Fire Dynamics
FIRE 370 – Analytical Approaches to Public Fire Protection
FIRE 380 – Managerial Issues in Hazardous Materials
FIRE 400 – Fire Protection Structures and Systems Design
Highlights of Our Online Bachelor’s in Fire Administration – Fire Science Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our BS in Fire Administration – Fire Science degree is offered 100% online, allowing you to fit your education into your schedule.
As a student, you will complete a capstone course, which will allow you to combine all your knowledge into a hands-on, realistic scenario.
Throughout your fire science studies, you’ll have access to a wealth of online resources and materials through Liberty’s research portal."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/fire-administration/emergency-medical-services/","Prepare to Facilitate Successful Emergency Medical and Fire Service Departments with a Bachelor’s Degree in Fire Administration
Do you want to make a tangible difference in the lives of others? Are you looking to advance your career into leadership positions in public service? A Bachelor of Science (BS) in Fire Administration – Emergency Medical Services (EMS) can help you prepare to save lives in many ways.
Fire services have evolved beyond just firefighting. This field now includes community education and outreach for fire prevention, fire investigation, fire inspections, response to hazardous material incidents, disaster response and recovery, and emergency medical services. There is a need for individuals with higher education in the administration of these services.
By offering a specialization in emergency medical services, we acknowledge the increasingly diverse and technical nature of fire services and seek to broaden your education to facilitate these essential services. If you are a current or aspiring EMS professional who is looking to expand your technical knowledge or advance to positions of greater responsibility, our Bachelor of Science in Fire Administration – Emergency Medical Services may be right for you.
Number of Fire Inspector Jobs, 2021
Job Outlook for Fire Inspectors, 2021-31
Median Pay for Fire Inspectors, 2021
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Fire Inspectors (viewed online June 28, 2023). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Fire Science Degree in Emergency Medical Services?
Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science in Fire Administration – Emergency Medical Services is designed to support current and future firefighters, emergency medical technicians, emergency managers, and professionals in similar occupations seeking new skills or career advancement. You can learn how to make a real difference and even save the lives of others in your community.
Our courses are all taught from a biblical worldview. With faculty members who are firmly grounded in Scripture and Christian ethics, we provide a unique learning environment where you can both expand your knowledge and deepen your faith. In a field that has such frequent and poignant interactions with the public, a deep understanding of biblical principles is essential.
The 100% online format of our undergraduate fire science degree allows you to further your education while maintaining your personal commitments. With 8 different start dates per year and no set login times, you can take the next step in your education without putting your life on hold.
Generous Discount for Active Duty Law Enforcement and Other First Responders 
Liberty University is committed to providing world-class education and aims to help students achieve their educational goals in whatever ways we can. The First Responder Tuition Discount was created to take some of the financial burdens of tuition off the men and women who work in public service.
As Liberty University’s way of saying “Thank you,” we proudly provide you with the following benefits:
A 25% tuition discount
Personalized service throughout your educational journey
Potential college credit for training and life experience
Potential stacking with other tuition benefits (Corporate Advantage Program or military benefits)
What Will You Learn in Our Emergency Medical Services and Fire Administration Online Degree?
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Fire Administration – Emergency Medical Services online degree program is designed to help you develop the skills needed to become an asset to a public service department. The program covers a breadth of areas in government, business, and public administration. Furthermore, the curriculum also includes courses focused on fire administration and emergency management. In these courses, you will study:
Administration of fire and emergency service organizations
Behavioral dimensions of disaster
Fire prevention and protection
Human resources management in fire service organizations
Incident command system/emergency planning and incident management
Leadership in fire service organizations
Legal and political issues in fire administration
The specialization in emergency medical services covers specific key areas that can help a department succeed. These areas include community risk reduction, EMS quality management, risk management and safety, foundations of EMS systems, legal, political, and regulatory environment of emergency medical services.
This comprehensive curriculum can help prepare you for various roles within a fire and emergency medical services department. Strong and well-educated leaders can make a significant and tangible difference in the lives of those in their communities. Partner with Liberty University and set yourself up for success in your future career.
Featured Courses
EMER 315 – EMS Risk Management and Safety*
EMER 335 – Management of Emergency Medical Services
EMER 355 – Legal, Political, and Regulatory Environment of EMS*
EMER 375 – EMS Quality Management*
*Course guide coming soon
Highlights of Our Bachelor of Science in Fire Administration – Emergency Medical Services Online Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can finish this Bachelor of Science in Fire Administration – Emergency Medical Services in as little as 3.5 years!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/forensic-science/","B.S. in Forensic Science
Residential Forensic Science Program
The Bachelor of Science in Forensic Science degree provides students with interdisciplinary training in chemistry, biology, and criminal justice. Graduates have the opportunity to begin careers with the Virginia Department of Forensic Science, the medical examiner’s office, local police departments, the Department of Health, the FBI, the Department of Homeland Security, local and regional offices of the Chief Medical Examiner, the National Institute of Health, the Naval Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS), and many more.
The Forensic Science program has developed relationships with local, regional, and national forensic science laboratories. These laboratories include the Toxicology Section of the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) in the District of Columbia, the Virginia Department of Forensic Science in Roanoke, VA, NMS Laboratories in Willow Grove, PA, the Bode Technology Group in Lorton, VA, Parabon Nanolabs, Inc. in Reston, VA.
The B.S. in Forensic Science is offered through the Department of Biology & Chemistry.
Academics: Forensic Science (B.S.)
Featured Courses
Forensic Chemistry (CHEM 357)
Intro to Forensics (CJUS 360)
Forensic DNA Analysis (BIOL 361)
Forensic Entomology (BIOL 421)
Trace Evidence (BIOL 465)
Criminal Investigations I & II (CJUS 420, 421)
Student Placement & Success Outlook
Internships & Independent Studies
Internships
Through Liberty’s Washington Fellowship, you can apply for a semester-long internship with the FBI, NCIS, the District of Columbia OCME, and other agencies. This internship will allow you to receive academic internship credit while learning valuable life skills that can be used in the professional forensic science field or to pursue graduate studies.
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
Read about our FEPAC accreditation in Forensic science program joins exclusive list for national FEPAC accreditation from Liberty News.
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities
Criminal Investigator
Criminalist – Serology
Evidence Technician
Forensic Chemist/Toxicologist
Forensic Consultant
Forensic DNA Analyst
Forensic Autopsy Technician
Forensic Entomologist
Forensic Examiner – Trace Evidence
Forensic Quality Assurance Specialist
Forensic Scientist
Forensic Microbiologist
Trace Evidence Technician"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/fire-administration/","Earn a World-Class Emergency Management Degree with Liberty University’s Fire Science Program
Personnel in fire services do many things for their communities – from educating on fire prevention and protection to providing emergency medical and preparedness services. With such an enormous responsibility, fire departments need knowledgeable leaders with advanced training in fire administration to effectively protect their communities. 
Are you looking for emergency management training specialized in fire administration to help take your career to the next level? If so, Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science in Fire Administration may be for you! 
Management positions within the fire science field often require a bachelor’s degree. Earning a bachelor’s degree in fire administration could help set you apart from others in your field and help increase your career opportunities. Our program is designed to provide you with a strong foundation in administration and leadership. We want to help you prepare for advanced positions in fire service organizations.
Is a fire science degree worth it?
A fire science degree focuses on the administrative and technical skills behind fire fighting and inspecting. Our online fire science bachelor’s degree can help prepare you to work in the fire fighting industry in a variety of roles. You could become a fire chief, an administrator, or a forest fire prevention specialist.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the median annual salary for firefighters in 2021 was $50,700.* Professionals who held a bachelor’s degree in 2021 earned approximately 65% more per week than those who only held a high school diploma.** With Liberty’s online fire services degree, you can prepare to pursue a variety of leadership positions within the field.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Firefighters, 2021 (viewed online Nov 9, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
**Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Earnings and unemployment rates by educational attainment, 2021 (viewed online Nov. 9, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
How long does it take to get a fire science degree?
Can you get a fire science degree online?
What is the best college for fire science?
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Fire Science Degree Online? 
Liberty University’s online fire administration bachelor’s degree is designed to help professional firefighters advance in their careers. Graduates can pursue leadership and administration roles in emergency service organizations by building on their skills and professional training. This program can help develop fire administration leaders who understand and accept responsibility for public safety and protection.
By incorporating teachings from a Christian perspective, our fire administration bachelor’s degree can help prepare you to apply Christian values to your work. This program trains fire administration professionals to ethically protect the lives and property of the people they serve.
Tuition Discount for Law Enforcement and Other First Responders 
Liberty University is committed to providing world-class education and aims to help students achieve their educational goals in whatever ways we can. The First Responder tuition discount was created to take some of the financial burdens off the men and women who work in public service.
As Liberty University’s way of saying “Thank you,” we proudly provide you with the following benefits:
A 25% tuition discount
Personalized service throughout your educational journey
Potential college credit for training and life experience
Potential stacking with other tuition benefits (Corporate Advantage Program or military benefits)
What Will You Learn in Our Online Fire Science Classes?
Fire departments need highly trained professionals who can serve their communities with confidence. Raising awareness, conducting home fire safety checks, and communicating fire safety messages play a critical role in preventing hazardous fires. Through an exciting exploration of emergency management and fire administration courses, you can learn about what it takes to keep a community safe.
Our courses place a high emphasis on a fire administrator’s role within the community because you will be in charge of protecting thousands of lives. Each class can equip you with specialized training in communication and leadership to help prepare you for the responsibility you will hold as a fire administrator. If you are passionate about being a leader in your field, Liberty University’s fire administration degree is an excellent option for you!
Fire Management Degree Featured Courses
CJUS 381 – Incident Command System/Emergency Planning and Incident Management
FIRE 310 – Fire Prevention and Protection
FIRE 330 – Human Resources Management in Fire Service Organizations
FIRE 450 – Leadership in Fire Service Organizations
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s Degree in Fire Science Online
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your fire service administration degree online from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting. 
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty graduates are often sought after by prestigious companies for their integrity, personal discipline, and versatility.
You will have access to vast online resources and materials through Liberty’s research portal while completing your fire tech studies.
You may have the opportunity to transfer in up to 75% of your college credits!
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/global-studies/","B.S. in Global Studies

Residential Degree in Global Studies
The Global Studies program is designed to produce Christ-centered leaders with the values, knowledge, and intercultural skills required to excel as individuals in their communities, lead as professionals in their fields and serve as followers of Christ in the global context of the 21st century.
Global Studies Internship
Second semester of junior year
Earn 15 hours of university credit
Ethnographic research project, language learning, and cross-cultural service opportunities
Return for debriefing and continued discipleship in senior year
Due to the unique timing of the internship semester, it is very important that you fill out the GLST Internship Tracking Form as soon as you have declared the major.
Academics: B.S. in Global Studies 
Global Studies Courses You Could Take
Introduction to Global Studies (GLST 200)
Intercultural Communication and Engagement (GLST 220)
Cultural Anthropology (GLST 290)
Career Preparation for Global Workers (GLST 385)
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities in Global Studies
Global opportunities in education/TESL/business/healthcare/communications/etc when combined with a double-major or minor in another discipline
Humanitarian aid work
Short-term/long-term field personnel with global disciple-making organizations
Global Mobilizer with a church or non-profit organization
Graduate Studies in related fields
Refugee work"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/geography/","Gain a Fundamental Understanding of How Geography Influences People’s Lives with Liberty’s Bachelor of Science (BS) in Geography Degree
Are you interested in earning a degree that can help you understand the full implications of geography and how it impacts the lives of people around the world? Perhaps you’re interested in several career fields, and you’re looking for a respected degree that can help make you a versatile job candidate. If so, Liberty University’s online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Geography degrees may be a great fit for you. Our geography programs are offered 100% online with no set login times and no required intensives so that you can earn your degree from the comfort of your home.
Geography is much more than the study of maps and state capitals — geography has helped weave the fabric of our history, and geographical implications are reflected through culture, language, and social structures. Our online geography degrees can help equip you with an understanding of regional and global geography, geographic information systems, and more. Partner with us and gain valuable geographic knowledge that can help you pursue multiple career paths.
Why Choose One of Liberty’s Online Geography Degrees?
As a pioneer in distance education since 1985, Liberty understands what it takes to design an online degree program that will challenge you to grow academically, personally, and professionally. Our BS in Geography programs were created with your success in mind, and at Liberty, you’ll benefit from the guidance of expert professors with years of real-world experience.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, geographers earned an average of $85,220 in 2021 — which is equivalent to just over $40 per hour.* Urban planning, another career field that our online geography degree can help prepare you for, is also known to offer above-average pay. In 2021, the average salary for an urban planner was $78,500, and demand for urban planners is projected to grow by 4% by 2031. ** Liberty’s online geography degree can help you pursue these jobs and other well-paying careers upon graduation.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Geographers (viewed online August 10, 2023). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
**Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Urban and Regional Planners (viewed online August 10, 2023). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s Degree in Geography?
In addition to general education courses, our bachelor’s degrees in geography online feature courses such as Geographic Research Methods, Human Geography, and Regional Studies in Geography. 
Your major courses offer an overview of geography, helping you gain the fundamental skills needed for your specialization courses. The programs also took a look at geographic information systems (GIS), which is a highly valued skill in the world of geography today. Overall, our Bachelor of Science (BS) in Geography degrees allow you to earn a world-class education from the comfort of your home. Through these programs’ curriculum, you can become better equipped to analyze geographical landscapes and present lasting solutions to real-world issues that require geographical knowledge.
Featured Courses
CRST 290 – History of Life
GEOG 300 – Geographic Research Methods
GEOG 370 – Geographic Information Systems I
GEOG 371 – Geographic Information Systems II
Online Geography Degree Specializations 
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/b-a-in-government-national-security-studies/","Residential Program in Government: National Security Studies
Prepare for success in the multi-disciplined field of National Security. Get training in the areas of national defense, homeland security, counter-terrorism, and more with a B.A. in Government – National Security Studies degree at Liberty University.
In addition to your foundational courses in the B.A. in Government program, the National Security Studies concentration exposes you to a wide range of national security issues including strategy, lawmaking, implementation, and enforcement.
Here, you’ll explore internal and external threats to national security, such as terrorist activities and internal subversion and how to counter them. And, in our advanced intelligence analysis course (GOVT 498), you’ll have access to specialized computer hardware and software to conduct analysis of real-world issues.
Study under Christian faculty who share your passion for national and global security. And learn from leading national professionals on how to handle and solve national crises.
If you would like to have less of a focus on language skills in your degree and have more elective opportunities, see the B.S. in Government: National Security Studies degree.
Other Degree Programs Featuring National Security:
B.S. in Government: National Security Studies (residential)
B.S. in Government – National Security Studies (online)
Academics: Government (B.A.): National Security Studies
National Security Studies Courses
Critical Infrastructure Protection (CJUS 382 )
Political and Economic Development (GOVT 405 )
Counter-Terrorism (GOVT 481)
Strategic Intelligence (GOVT 484 )
Start Your Career in National Security
National Security Career Opportunities
Counter-Terrorism Agent
Federal Agent
Intelligence Analyst
Law Enforcement Officer
Department of Homeland Security Agent
Military Officer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/government-politics-policy-ba/","Request Info Apply Now
Residential B.A. in Government: Politics & Policy
Gain a diverse introduction to political and economic ideas, government institutions, free market processes, and more through our B.A. in Government: Politics & Policy degree.
Learn more about the close relationship between a system of limited constitutional government and the free enterprise economy. And get an overview of the Christian worldview with regard to government and economics.
Prepare for your career with this degree as you compare the scope, methodologies, and major schools of political science, including its links with history, economics, and other cognate fields.
The Bachelor of Arts degree has a greater focus on language skills than the Bachelor of Science. If you would rather incorporate less language and more math, science, and technology into your degree, see the B.S. in Government: Politics and Policy degree.
Learn How To:
Evaluate comparative political and economic theories as they relate to the field of government
Demonstrate the ways in which domestic and international political and policymaking processes interact
Understand the issues, interest, and institutions of American state and local government in the framework of federalism
Speak a foreign language
Academics: Politics & Policy Cognate
Courses You Could Take
Constitutional Government & Free Enterprise (GOVT 200)
Introduction to Political Science (GOVT 210)
American Executive Processes/Institutions (GOVT 320)
American Legislative System (GOVT 322)
Prepare for a Career in:
Chamber of Commerce Manager
Political Scientist
City Manager
Politician
Public Administrator
Legislative Analyst
Community Organizer
Political Consultant"
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/b-s-in-government-national-security-studies/","Residential Program in Government: National Security Studies
Prepare for success in the multi-disciplined field of National Security. Get training in the areas of national defense, homeland security, counter-terrorism, and more with a B.S. in Government – National Security Studies degree from Liberty University.
In addition to your foundational courses in the B.S. in Government program, the National Security Studies concentration exposes you to a wide range of national security issues including strategy, lawmaking, implementation, and enforcement.
Here, you’ll explore internal and external threats to national security, such as terrorist activities and internal subversion and how to counter them. And, in our advanced intelligence analysis course (GOVT 498), you’ll have access to specialized computer hardware and software to conduct analysis of real-world issues.
Study under Christian faculty who share your passion for national and global security. And learn from leading national professionals on how to handle and solve national crises.
If you would like to focus on language skills in your degree, see the B.A. in Government: National Security Studies degree.
Other Degree Programs Featuring National Security:
B.A. in Government: National Security Studies (residential)
B.S. in Government – National Security Studies (online)
Academics: Government (B.S.): National Security Studies
National Security Studies Courses
Critical Infrastructure Protection (CJUS 382 )
Political and Economic Development (GOVT 405 )
Counter-Terrorism (GOVT 481)
Strategic Intelligence (GOVT 484 )
Start Your Career in National Security
National Security Career Opportunities
Counter-Terrorism Agent
Federal Agent
Intelligence Analyst
Law Enforcement Officer
Department of Homeland Security Agent
Military Officer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/government/intelligence/","Protect Lives and Defend Our Nation’s Interests with a Bachelor’s in Government – Online Intelligence Degree
Our country’s government, military, and law enforcement agencies rely on highly protected and classified information to make important decisions regarding national security. With Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Government – Intelligence, you can become equipped to gather and analyze such information and use it to help manage crises, inform national defense planning, foil the efforts of our enemies’ intelligence agencies, influence international security measures, and more.
This program focuses on methods for identifying and preventing threats to the homeland and American national interests worldwide. Throughout your courses, you can learn about the role of the intelligence community and the primary responsibilities of analysts and agents in this field. You’ll also study the history of U.S. intelligence and examine methods for carrying out intelligence operations, giving you a strong theoretical and practical foundation for your future endeavors.
Whether you are looking to advance your current career or are just getting started in this industry, we can help provide the training and skills you need. Partner with us and prepare to defend the lives, safety, and well-being of our country and its people.
Why Choose Liberty’s BS in Government – Intelligence Degree Program?
Are you worried that school may get in the way of your other commitments and priorities? If so, Liberty has just what you need. Our intelligence degree is offered 100% online with 8-week courses and no set login times. You can complete your degree on a schedule that works for you and take the next step in your education without putting your life on hold.
At Liberty, you won’t have to sacrifice quality for flexibility. We are regionally accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). Additionally, our commitment to excellence helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. All of our courses are led by professors who have years of experience both in academia and out in the field – so you can be confident that you’re receiving the best in higher education.
By partnering with us for your online bachelor’s in intelligence, you won’t just earn a degree – you can develop the knowledge, values, and skills essential for impacting the world. Our goal is to develop ethical, upstanding professionals who will lead the way as thinkers and innovators in their industry without compromising their integrity. As an online intelligence major at Liberty, you can learn how to defend your loved ones, your community, and our nation while helping to ensure peace and security for all.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Intelligence?
This program includes core courses in fundamental aspects of government. You’ll study topics such as comparative politics, American constitutional history, and political theory. You can also develop essential skills in public policy research and writing as well as American foreign policy. By understanding these foundational concepts, you can prepare to become a force for good in government – whether at the local, state, or federal level.
Building on your core studies, you’ll take classes that are specific to the intelligence specialization. Through this area of study, you can learn how to address threats to our country and other major issues that affect national and homeland security. Some of the areas you’ll explore include:
An introduction to the field of intelligence and the intelligence community within the framework of the Department of Homeland Security
Application of ethical standards to intelligence work
Classic intelligence failures as well as some of the unpublished successes of the intelligence community
Identification, prioritization, and protection of critical infrastructure including agriculture, telecommunications, transportation, energy, water, and emergency services
Methods for undermining our enemies’ intelligence activities and protecting American information and intelligence methods
Tactical military intelligence operations and the related military branch intelligence agencies
Theoretical and practical aspects of homeland security and emergency management
To round out your degree, you’ll complete several free elective courses. You could use these as an opportunity to further your studies in government and intelligence – or you could branch out into another area that interests you and diversify your skill set! With such a wide array of skills, you can become an asset to government agencies and private organizations alike as you pursue a career in intelligence and security.
Featured Courses
CJUS 380 – Introduction to Homeland Security
CJUS 382 – Critical Infrastructure Protection
GOVT 483 – Military Operations and Intelligence
GOVT 487 – Ethics in Intelligence
Highlights of Our Bachelor’s in Government – Online Intelligence Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University is accredited by SACSCOC, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges.
You can finish this intelligence degree in as little as 3.5 years – faster than a typical residential program!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/government-politics-policy-bs/","Request InfoApply Now
Residential Program for the B.S. in Government: Politics & Policy Degree
Through our B.S. in Government: Politics & Policy degree, you’ll study the office and legal powers of government executives, particularly the president, including trends in the presidency during periods of conservative and liberal dominance.
Survey the political and economic thought since the 16th century including the Christian influence in the development of modern Western freedom and justice. Study the issues, interest, and institutions of American state and local government in the framework of federalism.
You will also gain an understanding of the scope, methodologies, and major schools of political science.
If you would like to incorporate a liberal arts/language focus into your degree, view our B.A. in Government – Politics and Policy degree.
Learn How To:
Evaluate comparative political and economic theories as they relate to the field of government
Demonstrate the ways in which domestic and international political and policymaking processes interact
Communicate effectively in both written and oral formats
Integrate ethical and values-driven decision making in government scenarios
Academics: Politics & Policy Cognate
Politics & Policy Courses
Ancient Political and Economic Ideas (GOVT 301)
Modern Political and Economic Ideas (GOVT 302)
American Constitutional History (GOVT 421)
Political Theory (GOVT 490)
Career Opportunities With This Degree
Chamber of Commerce Manager
City Manager
Community Organizer
Legislative Analyst
Political Scientist
Politician
Public Administrator
Political Consultant"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/government/national-security/","Prepare to Protect Your Country with a National Security Bachelor’s Degree
You are passionate about guarding the innocent. You dream of protecting your country and those in your community. You are seeking an exciting career in a fast-paced field.
If that sounds like you, Liberty’s online B.S. in Government – National Security degree can help! This program offers multidisciplinary training in homeland security, strategic intelligence, and counterterrorism. You can learn how to defend your country, while also gaining core skills in lawmaking and government leadership.
Prepare to serve in the private or public sector. By learning how to counter various threats to national security, you can promote freedom, justice, and peace in the United States.
What is national security?
The federal government is responsible for protecting our country and its citizens from various threats, both internal and external. That process is known as “national security” or “national defense.”
National security is a broad field that encompasses many aspects of public safety, including economics, cybersecurity, energy, food, military, and environmental security. Thus, national security involves guarding against many types of threats — both military and non-military — to a nation’s well-being.
Why Choose Liberty University’s National Security Degree Online?
As far as colleges with national security degrees go, we believe Liberty stands out. Our Bachelor of Science in National Security is available 100% online, and the classes have no set login times. You can earn your degree from the comfort of your home, without putting your life on hold. The best part? You can stay invested in your family and career while achieving your academic goals!
Our national security professors have years of experience working in government and counterterrorism. With their guidance, you can develop practical skills that will help you stand out from the competition. Whether you’re looking to launch a new career or enter the workforce for the first time, this program can equip you for success.
Liberty has been a pioneer in distance learning since 1985. A lot has changed since then, but our commitment to Training Champions for Christ has not. We seek to develop leaders who are guided by duty, honor, and morality. Partner with us and prepare to use your skills in service to God and others.
Frequently Asked Questions
What is a national security analyst?
How long does it take to earn a national security degree?
What can you do with a national security degree?
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in National Security Online Courses?
Explore foundational topics in government, including comparative politics, public policy, political theory, American foreign policy, and American constitutional history. You can learn how to lead our country through all manner of threats and crises, while finding ways to promote peace and security.
Develop a holistic approach to national security. This degree offers a mix of homeland security and military operations intelligence courses so that you can develop a diverse and marketable skill set.
Analyze practical ways to improve homeland security policies and procedures. In this program, you’ll learn how to identify potential disasters, implement public communication strategies, and carry out emergency planning at the local, state, and federal levels. With this knowledge, you can help fight terrorism and lead recovery efforts in the wake of disaster.
Learn how to protect critical infrastructure, including agriculture, telecommunications, medical services, transportation, and postal services. Our national security courses can help equip you to address many types of threats — both internal and external — that could undermine our nation’s well-being.
Featured Courses
CJUS 382 – Critical Infrastructure Protection
GOVT 376 – Resilient Nations
GOVT 481 – Counter-Terrorism
GOVT 483 – Military Operations and Intelligence 
Highlights of Our National Security and Counter-Terrorism Online Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online national security degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
The courses in this program are only 8 weeks long, with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
As an online student, you can access a wealth of resources through our top-notch research portal."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/government/politics-and-policy/","Influence Your Local, State, and National Government with an Online Bachelor’s Degree in Government – Public Policy and Politics!
Do you have a passion for political science and creating policy? Have you ever wanted to work in Washington D.C., or at your local government offices? If so, Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science in Government – Politics and Policy program may be for you! Our government and policy degree can equip you with the knowledge and skills you need to pursue a policy career at the national, state, or local level.
Through policy studies such as comparative politics, modern political and economic ideas, international relations, and American constitutional history, this degree can provide you with valuable training needed for careers in public service. Constructing policy in a legal, ethical manner is a crucial function of godly government and legislative leaders — and with a degree from Liberty, you can prepare to serve with integrity. 
Our government and politics degree seeks to teach you how to create and interpret policy through a biblical lens. Don’t begin your job search unprepared. Get the public policy education you need at Liberty University.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Public Policy and Politics Degree?
As a public policy major, you will study under professors who take what they’ve learned through real-world experience, translate that information into practical application, and help bring your classroom experience to life. 
The Helms School of Government offers programs like the politics and policy degree to develop principled, driven leaders whose commitment to country is preceded only by their devotion to God and family. At Liberty, we pride ourselves on being an institution of higher education that promotes this commitment by designing a curriculum that celebrates the Bible and the U.S. Constitution.
If you are in search of a degree program that can help prepare you for public policy jobs and law school alike, look no further than Liberty’s online bachelor’s degree in government – public policy and politics.
Public Policy vs. Political Science: What’s the difference?
Public policy is a specific subject within political science that focuses on how and why some policies become law and why others don’t. Essentially, political science is a broader field than public policy, which is a niche subject.
What Will You Learn in the Online Bachelor’s in Government – Politics and Public Policy Degree Program?
Our online bachelor’s degree in politics and policy can help give you the training you need to become an effective government leader. As a policy and politics major, you will examine competing political theories and ideologies that challenge you to critically evaluate your own political convictions. You will also study economics, political science, public administration, and American politics throughout this degree program.
This degree won’t just help you evaluate and understand current issues and events. By studying government, politics, and policy at Liberty, you will also be taught to differentiate between a variety of economic, ecological, demographic, and security challenges that exist within the global community. In addition, you will engage in informed reading, research, analysis, and discussion of public policy topics.
Featured Courses
GOVT 302 – Modern Political and Economic Ideas
GOVT 320 – American Executive Processes/Institutions
GOVT 327 – State and Local Government
GOVT 470 – Government Regulation of Business
BS in Politics and Policy Program Highlights
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Students pursuing our Bachelor of Science in Government have access to a wide variety of resources through Liberty’s research portal."
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/graphic-design-bfa/","BFA in Graphic Design
Residential Degree in Graphic Design
Request Info Apply NowLiberty’s Bachelor of Fine Arts (BFA) in Graphic Design degree allows you to perfect your craft as you prepare for a career in branding, illustration, packaging design, textile design, user interface, and more.
You’ll work with professors who are producing designs for consumers and learn through practice-based courses. Real-world experience comes through internships with marketing agencies and design firms.
A student can declare the BFA at the time of admission.
With a focus in Graphic Design, you’ll learn how to:
Create visual imagery using digital practices
Use graphic design as a tool for visual communication
Create vector images for a variety of media
Enhance software mastery and concept development
Produce digital and interactive publications
Develop identity systems for corporations
Design and produce a fully integrated campaign
Prepare digitized art for electronic media and the printed page
The BFA in Graphic Design degree is also offered online.
Academics: Graphic Design Cognate
Courses in Graphic Design
Digital Imaging (ARTS 342)
Vector Illustration (ARTS 332)
Interactive Publication (ARTS 380)
Publication Design (ARTS 340)
Advanced Typography (ARTS 424)
Career Opportunities in Graphic Design
Illustrator
Web Designer
Graphic Designer
Advertising Director
Graphic Arts Technician
Typeface Designer
Art Director
Design Director
Animator
Print Designer
Graphic Design Student Testimonial
I feel especially prepared for the job market after I graduate because I followed the advice of my professors and decided to upgrade my degree from a Bachelor of Science to a Bachelor of Fine Arts. The additional time in SADA’s BFA program equipped me with all the essentials I will need as I head out into the workforce, and it helped me to further develop my portfolio.
– Kevin Scott"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/government/public-administration/","Make a Difference in Your Community with an Online Public Administration Bachelor’s Degree
Are you passionate about serving the common good? Do you want to use your leadership skills in government roles? Are you seeking a job that lets you effect positive change in society? If so, you may want to consider a career in public administration! Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science in Government – Public Administration can help equip you to work in the private or public sector. From government agencies to nonprofit organizations, you can pursue many jobs that require strong leadership and communication skills.
Public administrators are responsible for implementing government policies on a practical level. With careful planning, they can carry out government directives in a cost-effective manner and design programs that benefit the public. Our bachelor’s in public administration can help foster the skills you need to oversee government projects, balance budgets, and ensure laws are enforced.
At Liberty, we have created our B.S. in Government degree with your success in mind. We offer affordable tuition rates, quality academics, and a flexible online format — all with the goal of helping you pursue a rewarding career. Partner with us and prepare to give back to your community.
Why study public administration?
What is the difference between public policy and public administration?
Which is better: a BS in Public Administration or a BA in Government Administration and Development?
Why Choose Liberty University’s Public Administration Program?
If you’re worried that school will get in the way of your other commitments and priorities, we have just what you need. This government degree is offered 100% online, which means you can complete your coursework wherever and whenever it’s most convenient for you! Our classes are only 8 weeks long and have no set login times, providing the flexibility you need to take the next step in your academic journey.
Liberty’s bachelor’s degree in public administration is designed to help develop leaders who are guided by duty, honor, and morality. In this program, you’ll study under professors who have years of experience working in government. They will take what they have learned in their own careers and translate it into practical applications that bring your classroom experience to life.
As a Christian university, we believe moral integrity is an essential part of a functional government. To fulfill our mission of Training Champions for Christ, we’ll help equip you to analyze political theories and practices through the lens of a biblical worldview.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Degree in Public Administration?
Our public administration online degree dives into various aspects of government processes, policies, personnel, and politics. Throughout this program, you will examine various political ideologies and positions so you can find innovative solutions to government problems. You can also learn how to manage public projects and programs that improve the lives of everyday citizens.
Additionally, Liberty’s online government classes can help you understand how to resolve various conflicts within the global community. You’ll take an in-depth look at aspects of American government, including American exceptionalism, foreign policy, and constitutional history. Whether you want to serve in your local government, lead at the national level, or manage projects for a nonprofit, we can help you pursue your goals.
Explore how government agencies impact the private business sector. With this knowledge, you can help implement programs that protect individuals’ constitutional rights and promote the general welfare. You will also learn about the financing and budgeting aspects of public administration so you can carry out government policies in a cost-effective manner.
Ultimately, our goal is to help you integrate economic theory, management principles, administrative law, and political theory to resolve various problems in the public sector. Our senior seminar can help you synthesize what you’ve learned and apply it to the real world.
Featured Courses
GOVT 329 – American Exceptionalism
GOVT 360 – Introduction to Public Administration
GOVT 462 – Public Finance and Budgeting
GOVT 470 – Government Regulation of Business
Highlights of Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Government Management Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your public administration bachelor’s degree online from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our online courses are only 8 weeks long with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
Liberty is regionally accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
You can access a wealth of resources through our top-notch research portal while completing your government administration degree online.
By earning this government studies degree, you can pursue a variety of government, administration, and development careers.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Administrative Services Managers (viewed online September 3, 2020). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/health-sciences/bachelors/health-sciences/","Change Lives by Starting Your Career as a Healthcare Professional with Liberty’s Bachelor of Health Science Online
Are you interested in working in the healthcare field? Maybe you want to work with patients, doctors, or nurses. Maybe you’re interested in reporting on current events in healthcare or helping patients navigate insurance and other administrative concerns. By earning Liberty University’s online Bachelor of Science in Health Sciences, you can become better prepared to work in one of the allied health professions.
Our health science degree online is designed to provide you with academic knowledge integrated with a biblical worldview – so you can practice healthcare ethically. You can also gain the skills and tools needed to apply to a graduate program or pursue entry-level positions immediately after completing your degree. 
As a pioneer in distance education since 1985, we understand what it takes to design an online degree program capable of helping you learn new concepts, master new skills, impart knowledge, and prepare for career success without detracting from the things that matter most – like your job, family, and community. Partner with us to earn your bachelor’s in health science degree online and start making a difference in the lives of patients and other healthcare workers.
Is a Bachelor’s degree in health science worth it?
The beauty of our online degree in health science is its versatility. Far from a niche degree that prepares you for one specific job, our online Bachelor of Science in Health Sciences can help prepare you for a wide variety of careers – not just clinical settings. The healthcare field is so broad that there are countless opportunities for employment, and a bachelor’s in health science degree could be your ticket to the job in healthcare you love. So yes – in our opinion, a healthcare degree online is worth it.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Health Science Degree?
Choosing where to earn your degree is an important decision. At Liberty, we understand the weight of this decision, and we are excited that you are considering our program. Here are some of the reasons why you should pursue your online degree in health science with Liberty University:
Credibility | Liberty University is regionally accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). Earning your online health science degree from a university with this sort of recognition can help set you apart and prepare you to pursue your goals with confidence. 
Flexibility | Our health sciences bachelor’s degree is 100% online with 8-week courses and 8 different start dates each year. You can earn your degree while continuing to devote time to other priorities – like your job, church, and family.
Integrity | At Liberty, our mission is Training Champions for Christ. We honor that mission by incorporating biblical principles into all of our coursework, so you can become an ethical professional who values integrity.
Opportunities | Job opportunities in the allied health professions are practically limitless. By completing this program, you can explore a wide variety of entry-level positions. Plus, if you pair our program with a certification in the medical field or pursue graduate studies, your options can grow.
Can you become a nurse with a health science degree?
No. While this program can help prepare you for a variety of roles in healthcare settings, our online health sciences degree is not designed to lead to nursing licensure. If you are interested in earning a nursing degree online, please see our school of nursing’s webpage to find a program that is right for you. 
What Will You Learn in Our Health Sciences Bachelor’s Degree Online?
Health sciences is an exciting and diverse field that allows you to work in a variety of settings. You may choose to work in direct patient care, to manage or assist other medical professionals, or to work in healthcare data and administration. Our program can help prepare you to start your career upon graduation or to complete graduate programs or certifications to further develop your skills.
By completing our bachelor of health science online, you can learn how to:
Access, evaluate, and use evidence-based research effectively and appropriately
Demonstrate knowledge of medical terminology and effective written communication
Evaluate the nature and role of health from a biblical worldview
Integrate legal and ethical principles into professional decision-making
Use critical thinking strategies as a basis for identifying and addressing issues within the health sciences profession
This health degree online consists of 2 sections: major foundational courses and health sciences courses. The major foundational courses of this health science degree program consist of 2 courses: statistics, and science and society. From there, our health sciences degree online ventures into major coursework. 
Our health science bachelor degree online will guide you through an overview of legal and ethical issues in healthcare. You will also study healthcare administration, financial analysis and management, research and evidence-based practice, chemistry for health science professionals, and the history of life. In addition, this bachelor of health science online will guide you through applied human anatomy and physiology, human nutrition, public and community health for business, and wellness and behavior theories for business. 
Lastly, this online health science degree covers principles of epidemiology, biostatistics for business, and fundamental medical terminology. This online bachelor’s degree in health science is rounded out by free elective courses – meaning you’ll be able to choose specific topics of study that you’re most interested in or passionate about. 
Don’t put your career potential on hold any longer. Partner with us, earn a valuable credential, learn new skills, and launch your career in the health sciences. 
Featured Courses
BUSI 302 – Legal and Ethical Issues in Healthcare
CHEM 108 – Chemistry for Health Science Professionals
HLTH 105 – Introduction to the Health Professions
HLTH 330 – Human Nutrition
Highlights of Our BS in Health Science Online Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online bachelor’s degree in health sciences from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all online undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can complete your BS in Health Sciences online in as little as 3.5 years.
Our online health science program can help prepare you for graduate school or for a variety of entry-level positions in the allied health professions."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/visual-and-performing-arts/bachelors/graphic-design/","Foster Your Creativity and Learn Cutting Edge Techniques in Digital Design With a Degree in Graphic Design
You are at your best when you’re creating. There’s nothing better than seeing an idea come to life – and that’s what you’re good at! But why limit your creative outlets to just a hobby? Earning an online art degree can help you refine your natural talent and turn it into your profession, so you can pursue a career doing what you love.
With visual communication becoming more and more interactive, the need for graphic designers is growing. Companies need designers who are passionate about what they do to create compelling content for their audiences. It takes skill and practice to create beautiful websites, marketing campaigns, and an overall seamless user experience.
With a Bachelor of Fine Arts (BFA) in Graphic Design online, you can be better prepared for a variety of careers. Take your skills further as you create a portfolio of vector illustration, advanced typography, and 21st century-style artwork. With a graphic design degree, you can become extremely marketable to agencies and businesses looking for skilled graphic designers.
If you are looking for a way to prepare for a career in design, look no further. Liberty’s 100% online bachelor’s degree in graphic design seeks to provide the hands-on style of learning you’ll need to succeed.
Why Choose Liberty’s Graphic Design Online Degree?
We understand that earning a bachelor’s degree is an investment – so finding the right online graphic design degree is important! When you choose Liberty, you can be confident that you are being trained for your career under faculty that care.
Our professors have advanced degrees in related areas of study and are experienced graphic design industry leaders who are passionate about their craft. They understand the nuances of the graphic design field and are excited to partner with you as you pursue your graphic design education. 
In addition, your professors realize the importance of immersive, real-world experience. As you earn your bachelor’s of graphic design online, you will complete coursework centered on practical field applications you can use outside of the classroom. Whether you desire to move into a web design role or pursue a career as an illustrator, a BFA in graphic design online from Liberty can help.
Gain hands-on, practical experience
Choosing Liberty also means training and experiencing the job before you enter the workforce. With our online graphic design courses, you will complete a hands-on practicum and internship hours. Graphic design internships are one of the best ways to bridge the gap between earning a college degree and finding a job.
Our graphic design online degree students are required to work under the supervision of a degreed graphic design professional for practicum and internship experiences. This ensures that you receive the highest level of training – imagine walking away with not only a graphic arts degree but with an impressive résumé. After graduating, many students are able to receive a full-time job with the same company they interned with!
So is a graphic design degree worth it? 
The graphic design industry is competitive. In order to stand out, you need a way to show that you are better than the competition. That’s where a graphic arts degree can help! As you earn your graphic design bachelor’s degree, you can be confident that you are receiving a comprehensive education that covers the material covered by graphic design colleges while integrating knowledge from courses that are not within the graphic design major — like English, math, and science.
By fostering your graphic design skills and studying new techniques, a Bachelor of Fine Arts in Graphic Design can make you more marketable to potential employers. All of your graphic design coursework is structured to culminate in a final project before you graduate. The skills you learn can be displayed in a completed portfolio you can use to pursue your dream job.
Frequently Asked Questions
Can you do a graphic design degree online? 
Is graphic design a 2- or 4-year degree?
Is a graphic design degree worth it?
What degree is best for graphic design?
What is a graphic designer’s salary?
What Will You Learn in Our Graphic Design Classes Online?
Learning how to communicate visually is vital to connecting with people in ever-evolving digital environments. With so many companies competing for attention in this space, your ability to pique the interest of your target is valuable. Our online graphic design degree can help you use color, font, and images to evoke a response from your audience.
Our graphic design training program is designed with leading technology and methods in the graphic design field. Like many graphic design schools online, our graphic design courses focus on developing your ability to create artwork digitally. You will have access to the entire Adobe Creative Suite, which includes industry-standard software like Photoshop and InDesign. What’s more is that you can learn how to apply these skills and techniques in a variety of situations so that you can be job-ready upon graduation.
Throughout your BFA online classes, you will receive feedback from peers and professors for each of your design projects. By mirroring the constructive critique you receive in the workplace, Liberty’s online graphic design degree can help you refine your skills and prepare you for your career. At Liberty, you aren’t just another graphic design student – you have the opportunity to be immersed in the field with others, providing valuable critique, and partnering with professors who are dedicated to your success.
Additionally, you will explore the history of art so you can understand how your pieces fit within the evolution of artwork as a whole. By looking at artistic developments, you can build your own unique, modern skill set for the current graphic design field.
Our online graphic design program is designed to challenge and equip you with the knowledge and in-demand skills needed to thrive in this fast-paced industry. Whether your goal is to work in communications, design, or publishing, Liberty’s Bachelor of Fine Arts in Graphic Design can help you meet the demand for skilled designers with your expertise in the latest trends and software.
Featured Online Graphic Design Courses
ARTS 201 – History of Art I
ARTS 222 – Introduction to Graphic Design
ARTS 342 – Digital Imaging
ARTS 352 – Graphic Design I 
Highlights of Liberty’s Graphic Design Online Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years ̶ and counting. 
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can experience a challenging and rewarding curriculum through graphic design online courses and have access to Adobe Creative Cloud products like Photoshop and InDesign.
The portfolio project in this degree can become an invaluable promotional tool to help you secure a job in the graphic design industry.
The on-the-job training you can receive in this degree program can help equip you better market yourself in a competitive field.
Developing a professional network is also a positive outcome of earning a graphic design online degree. By connecting with peers, alumni, and your instructors, you can have a broad network of design professionals who can support and guide you.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/health-physical-education/","Residential Bachelor of Education in Health & Physical Education, Grades P-12 (B.Ed.) – Licensure
Graduate with your P-12 Virginia teaching license with an endorsement to teach health & physical education in public and private schools. Through the Health and Physical Education Degree (B.Ed.), you’ll impact student’s lives giving them the opportunity to learn new activities/sports and helping them benefit educationally as well.
Research shows that physical activity during the school day has been linked to improvement in cognitive performance, better grades, and classroom behaviors.
Approved by both the Virginia Department of Education and the ACSI (Association of Christian Schools International), the B.Ed. in Health and Physical Education degree gives you 300+ hours of hands-on experience.
Prepare for your successful career through a proven combination of lecture-based courses, activity courses, and practicum courses:
Lecture-based courses provide the rationale and methods behind teaching health and physical education.
Activity courses expose you to a variety of sports and/or activities that would be taught in a physical education setting.
Practicum courses give you 300+ hours of hands-on experience aiding, observing, and student teaching physical education & health classes in P-12 schools.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
Academics: Health and Physical Education Degree (P-12 Licensure)
Featured Physical Education & Health Courses
Intro to Education & Classroom Teaching (EDUC 201)
Physical Education Observations in Schools (PHED 189)
The School Health Program (HLTH 402)
Adapted Physical Education (PHED 435)
Department of Allied Health Professions 
Class Campus Facilities
Health and Physical Education Career Opportunities
Physical Education Teacher
Health Teacher
Coach/Referee
Director of Youth Camps
Director of Sports Programs
Athletic Administrator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/guitar-performance/","Residential Guitar Performance Program
The Bachelor of Music in Guitar Performance degree uniquely equips you as a skilled performer and music practitioner.
Learn from courses in applied music studies, conducting, music technology, improvisation studies, and contemporary styles survey. Prepare for a successful career in guitar performance. Study with our world-class, residential, guitar faculty. With the Guitar Performance (B.M.) degree, you’ll graduate with the technique, skills, and performance capabilities required to have a successful career in music.
Academics: Guitar Performance (B.M.)
Featured Guitar Performance Courses
Classical Guitar Ensemble I (MUSC 179)
Applied Music: Guitar (MUSC 351)
Commercial Improvisation Techniques (MUSC 360)
Guitar Literature (MUSC 381)
Guitar Pedagogy (MUSC 477)
Career Opportunities: Guitar Performance Graduates
Church musician
Instrumental soloist
Performing/recording artist
Product demonstrator
Theater musician"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/history/","Request Info Apply Now
Residential Program
Learn to think critically and contextually with a B.A. or B.S. degree in History from Liberty University. Get the solid training you need in general, world, European, and U.S. history that can open up future career opportunities in government, law, business, intelligence, and many other fields.
Through the Bachelor of Arts in History, you’ll have the opportunity to study an ancient language like Hebrew or Greek or a modern language like Spanish or French. This will help prepare you for graduate studies as many upper-level degrees require reading proficiency in foreign languages.
And with the Bachelor of Science in History, you’ll have more electives, giving you the opportunity to focus in on what interests you most.
History students are placed in internships and externships throughout the country. And many have worked in history related positions locally as well as in government or lobbying groups in Washington, D.C.
These degrees are offered through the Department of History.
Academic Information
Courses You Could Take
History of Western Civilization I (HIEU 201)
Historical Methodology (HIST 300)
Survey of American History I (HIUS 221)
Career Opportunities with a bachelor’s degree in History
Archaeologist
Architectural Historian
Archival Management
Bibliographer
Data Processor for Investment Firms
Diplomat
Genealogist"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/hospitality-management/","Residential Hospitality Management Degree
Get ready for an exciting career in one of the largest employment sectors in the United States. With a Bachelor of Science in Hospitality Management degree from Liberty University, you’ll train for management positions in hospitality service areas such as:
Conferences and Events
Foodservice
Guest Service
Lodging Management
Tourism
Familiarize yourself with the issues, challenges, opportunities, and nuances of the industry through courses that are relevant to today’s market. Through our curriculum, you’ll gain a solid business foundation that will foster both proactive and data-driven decision making.
In addition to receiving in-class instruction, you’ll get more than 500 hours of practical, hands-on experience in the field.
Learn from industry-savvy professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and who will provide context to managerial performances within the hospitality industry. Our B.S. in Hospitality Management program takes a holistic approach in developing exceptional managers and leaders who are equipped to handle today’s challenges, can capitalize on opportunities, and integrate a consistent Christian worldview into both their personal and professional lives.
This degree is offered through the Hospitality & Sport Management Department.
Get practical experience with on-campus partners like:
Sodexo (Foodservice)
Fairfield Inn & Suites (Lodging Management)
Liberty Mountain Conference Center (Conferences and Meetings)
LU Events (Special Events)
LU Athletics (Special Events)
Academics: B.S. in Hospitality Management
Featured Hospitality Management Courses
Principles of Tourism Management (TOUR 300)
Principles of Food Service Operations (HMGT 300)
Principles of Hotel Operations (HMGT 310)
Special Events Management (EMGT 320)
Guest Service Management (SMGT 440)
Career Opportunities in Hospitality Management
Meeting, Conference, Event Planner
Hospitality Marketing Manager
Hotel General Manager
General Manager – Restaurant
Convention & Visitor’s Bureau Management
Guest Service Manager
Director of Sales"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/history/","Explore the Past with Liberty’s Online History Degree
Do you have a keen interest in history? Liberty University’s online bachelor’s degree in history immerses you in an in-depth investigation of human society and events of the past. By uncovering the decisions and motivations of figures and people of the past, you can use the lessons of those events to better your future. 
Our online history degree is designed to train you to engage with a well-rounded examination of global history through a variety of insightful perspectives and presentations. You will explore various periods in American, European, and Western history by observing economic trends, political actions, wars, and public perception.
Many people think that history degree programs merely have you memorize facts and dates. In reality, your studies in history will hone your mind and make you a keen critical thinker. Your research skills will enable you to find the resources you need quickly. You can learn to dig deeper to find the facts that will support your argument. 
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Bachelor’s Degree in History?
Liberty University provides a 100% online history degree that gives you the flexibility you need to fit your studies into your life. While completing the bachelor’s degree in history online, you will gain crucial foundational research and analysis skills that will train you to be a responsible curator of historical perspectives of original documents. In our online history degree, you can learn many of the core skills for a career as a data analyst or intelligence analyst, all while studying fascinating periods in history and learning about world civilizations. 
You will also dig deep into fascinating historical periods that shaped the world we live in today. This background will give you the ability to appreciate modern events with informed insight.
What Are the Benefits of Pursuing Our Online History Degree?
Pursuing the Bachelor of Science in History will provide you with a well-rounded education in U.S. and world history. This can be a foundation for a future career in teaching or research.
Besides traditional bachelor’s in history jobs, there is a wide range of fields that can use your research ability and ability to analyze data.
In today’s world of smartphones and short attention spans, companies value employees who can construct an argument and present a well-thought-out solution to a problem. 
Do you have a military service background? All of Liberty University’s online programs offer military-friendly transfer policies and benefits. The B.S. in History also provides fascinating courses in military history, including ancient history, United States history of the civil war, and modern conflicts.
What Will You Learn in the Online History Degree?
Liberty University’s online bachelor’s degree in history is designed to provide you with practical, analytical, and research skills. Additionally, you will gain a comprehensive understanding of historical figures, places, and events. There is also the opportunity to select specialized areas of history. All online history students take courses such as historical methodology and geography for critical context and research skills and essential survey courses in western civilization and American history for the critical context of world events. 
Liberty’s historical methodology course will teach you what it means to be a historian. You can learn how to write a research paper and most importantly the process of studying history. Developing research skills and the ability to analyze the decisions and actions of past historical figures is a skill that will be very useful in fields such as market research or intelligence analysis.
You can then choose to study European, world, and U.S. history topic-specific electives and can further specialize in additional history and general electives. Our online history degree course content allows you to explore many cultures and time periods. You can then focus on the topics that interest you most, while still providing flexibility to pursue other courses useful for your career.
Online History Degree Featured Courses
GEOG 200 – Geography
HIEU 201 – History of Western Civilization
HIST 300 – Historical Methodology
HIUS 221 – Survey of American History
Highlights of Our Online History Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your history degree online from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years ̶ and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Learn from experienced historians with profound academic insights into fascinating periods of the past in our online history degree.
Gain hands-on experience by researching source documents and gleaning essential perspectives from events and people.
Customize your degree plan with electives to broaden your skill set or become an expert in a specialized field.
Take advantage of a minor to further focus or complement your history degree.
Liberty University’s online history degree is a flexible and marketable degree that provides many rewarding career options.
Take advantage of up to 90 transfer credits from previous college courses, work-related training, or military experience to finish your degree faster and focus on historical studies.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/healthcare-administration/","Pursue Your Passion for Healthy Living with Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Healthcare Administration
Liberty University is devoted to helping you pursue your passions with excellence. Our online Bachelor of Science in Healthcare Administration can help prepare you for careers in the healthcare management field. At Liberty, we are committed to helping you achieve your goals.
What is Healthcare Administration?
Healthcare administrators plan, direct, and coordinate medical and health services for organizations and businesses. As a healthcare administrator, you manage the benefits of employees as well as bridge the gap between benefits and physicians. These needs require a broad background in business skills and specialized knowledge of the healthcare field. With Liberty’s B.S. in Healthcare Administration, you can get the training and knowledge you need.
Our bachelor’s degree in healthcare administration is offered completely online. Because you don’t have to travel to a campus, you can remain active in your job, with your family, and in your community. You can take your healthcare courses online while saving time and money.
Unlike many online healthcare programs, Liberty’s bachelor’s degree in healthcare administration provides opportunities to seek an internship. An internship is strongly recommended with this degree, as it provides valuable, real-world experience. Having this experience can help establish you in the healthcare management and administration field while providing important networking opportunities.
Why Choose Liberty for Your Healthcare Administration Bachelor’s Degree?
We believe our healthcare administration degree program is a leader among health administration degrees. Your courses will be taught by professionals with real-world experience in clinical and leadership settings. Under their guidance, you can gain a foundational knowledge of legal issues in today’s healthcare business environment. You will also study interactions between political, cultural, and economic factors as you dive into ethics and policies.
What professional skills will I gain from the B.S. in Healthcare Administration?
Earning a healthcare management degree online from Liberty allows you to gain many marketable skills, such as:
Budget-setting and cost-saving techniques
Business communication for any setting
Leadership and conflict resolution techniques
Management skills for large-scale projects
Marketing and public relations knowledge
Our healthcare degree online format is designed to help you pursue your passion. You want more than a career — you want to make an impact. With our degree in health administration, you can learn how to be a successful leader and manager in the field.
What can you do with a healthcare administration degree?
Bachelor’s degrees in healthcare administration are designed to provide a mix of practical business skills and healthcare expertise.
With a healthcare administration degree, you may find yourself managing a network of employees at a hospital, making budget or policy decisions for a healthcare facility, or even providing procurement-based needs to a medical center.
Liberty’s B.S. in Healthcare Management provides this balance of general business content and specialized healthcare industry studies while helping you merge both into a useful whole. Having this variety of content can help you handle any health management challenges in the field.
What Will You Learn in Our Healthcare Administration Bachelor’s Degree?
Liberty’s bachelor’s in healthcare management degree online will provide you with the training needed to tackle challenges in the field. You will study what makes healthcare organizations effective, learn strategic planning methods, and master numerous proven business management techniques. You will also explore administrative and financial principles necessary for making informed decisions in the health administration field.
By completing our online degree in healthcare administration, you can gain a better understanding of healthcare policy and essential business skills. Our program prepares students for success through a strong foundation in business and management for a variety of healthcare careers.
Through our program, you can become equipped to pursue health benefits roles in corporate business, nonprofits, public service organizations, and many other fields. 
Healthcare administrators need to be prepared for many important responsibilities, including:
Assessing and improving the delivery of healthcare services
Establishing and maintaining records systems for staff and clients
Managing budgets and saving costs without compromising quality
Meeting state and federal law compliance requirements
Recruiting, training, and managing healthcare support employees
Working with healthcare facilities to set and accomplish departmental goals
Through Liberty’s health administration degree online program, you will study under professors who have real-world experience in hospital administration, clinical settings, outpatient facilities, and nearly every specialized field of health administration. You can learn from their vast years of experience, combined with your knowledge, to grow in practice and leadership.
Highlights of Liberty’s Online Healthcare Administration Degree Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online B.S. in Healthcare Administration degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Networking opportunities are available with other healthcare management professionals in the program from around the country.
Students may be eligible to earn additional credit through life experience.
This program is offered in an 8-week course format, with 8 different start dates each year, and no set login times.
You’ll demonstrate knowledge of the essential skills needed in the industry.
Students taking HLTH 491 — Grantsmanship will have free access to Foundation Center once enrolled in the course. Foundation Center is the world’s leading source of information on philanthropy, fundraising, and grant programs.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/hospitality-management/conference-event-management/","Residential Conference & Event Management Program
Expand your career options to include the field of hospitality with the Bachelor of Hospitality Management – Conference & Event Management degree.
In addition to your foundational courses in the B.S. Hospitality Management program, the Conference & Event Management Cognate teaches you how to develop, plan, and execute conferences, meetings, and special events. You will also have the opportunity to complete an internship and gain invaluable real-world experience.
Our faculty have a wide range of experience and will help you develop the skills and knowledge needed to make a difference for Christ in your workplace and community.
This degree is offered through the Hospitality & Sport Management Department.
Academics: Conference & Event Management Cognate
Featured Conference & Event Management Courses
Foundations of Project Management (BUSI 313)
Special Events Management (EMGT 320)
Conference and Meeting Management (EMGT 420)
Guest Service Management (SMGT 440)
Career Opportunities in Conference & Event Management
Administrative Services Manager
Meeting Planner
Corporate Planner
Conference Director
Association Planner
Convention Sales Manager
Event Planner
Special Event Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/human-services/","Make a Difference in Your Community with a Bachelor’s in Human Services Degree from Liberty University
Are you passionate about helping people work through life’s challenges? Do you want to become equipped for entry-level positions in the helping professions? If so, Liberty University’s online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Human Services can help! Our online human services degree program offers a blend of psychology, social work, and human services courses to help you effectively serve individuals and communities — both in the United States and around the world.
At Liberty, you can train to become a skilled, ethical human services professional who is capable of pursuing a variety of career paths. Whether you’re interested in case management, mental health support, or community outreach, our online degree in human services is designed to help you serve others with integrity and compassion. We provide valuable opportunities for you to enhance your knowledge of human services and put your skills to the test in real-world settings.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Degree in Human Services?
As a pioneer in distance education since 1985, Liberty knows how to create online programs that blend flexibility, affordability, and high-quality academics. Our bachelor’s degree in human services is offered 100% online, so you’ll have the freedom to complete your coursework without having to visit a college campus. You can stay invested in the things that matter — like your family, job, and community — while taking the next step in your academic journey.
At Liberty, we believe in the inherent worth and value of every individual. That’s why our online degree in human services is designed to help you understand the ethical aspects of the social services industry. Throughout this program, you’ll study a holistic approach to human services that accounts for the biological, psychological, social, and spiritual aspects of human existence. You won’t just earn a degree — you’ll learn how to foster lasting change in your community.
As a human services major, you’ll have access to cutting-edge course content as well as the opportunity to complete at least 1 internship in a human services setting. You’ll also study under faculty who have advanced degrees and years of experience in the social services field. With their guidance, you can strengthen your skill set and explore practical methods for meeting your clients’ needs.
Additionally, our bachelor’s in human services can provide a solid foundation for pursuing graduate studies in human services, counseling, psychology, or social work. Some of the degrees you could move onto include our master’s in human services counseling, licensure-track master’s degree in clinical mental health counseling, or Master of Social Work.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s Degree in Human Services Online?
Our online human services degree program seeks to foster social responsibility, regard for individual value, and sensitivity to the needs of others. This program offers a blend of quality course content and hands-on experience, so you can start making a difference in your community even before you graduate!
Throughout this degree program, you’ll learn about real-world application in the field of human services through courses in case management, multicultural counseling, abnormal psychology, and crisis intervention. You’ll also study group dynamics and the relationship between psychology and Christianity. The broad mix of human services, psychology, and social work classes offered in this degree can help ensure that you graduate career-ready.
As a human services worker, it’s vital that you know how to live out ethical principles while serving the people in your community. That’s why we offer a course on ethics in professional helping. You can also learn about chemical dependency, social welfare and policy, and the health of the social worker. The internship provides a valuable opportunity for you to gain marketable skills and experience, and the elective courses allow you to study the topics you’re most passionate about.
Featured Courses
HSER 201 – Survey of Human Services*
HSER 270 – Ethics in Professional Helping*
HSER 415 – Case Management Practice*
PSYC 317 – Crisis Intervention
*Course guide coming soon
Highlights of Our Online Human Services Degree Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your bachelor’s in human services online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University is accredited by SACSCOC, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges.
You can complete this major in human services in just 3.5 years!
As an online student, you can access a wealth of resources through our top-notch library portal."
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/healthcare-informatics/","Residential Healthcare Informatics Program
The Bachelor of Science in Informatics – Healthcare Informatics prepares students to meet the growing need for informatics professionals skilled in health technology. Students will learn advanced skills in the use of information technology in the healthcare field. Courses are taught by industry experts and cover topics such as healthcare coding and classification, data management, information security, pharmacology, and project management.
In addition to the required core classes on the degree completion plan, each student is required to complete various core classes that specialize in Informatics.
Academics: Healthcare Informatics Cognate
Featured Healthcare Informatics Courses
Foundations of Pharmacology (INFO 310)
Healthcare Informatics (INFO 320)
Healthcare Coding and Classification (INFO 321)
Healthcare Enterprise Systems (INFO 410)
Career Opportunities in Healthcare Informatics
Clinical Informatics Specialist
Director of Clinical Informatics
Health information systems manager
Healthcare project manager
Informatics Systems Analyst
Informatics Pharmacist"
"https://www.liberty.edu/engineering/bachelors/industrial-systems-engineering/","Residential Industrial & Systems Engineering Degree
Discover how you can improve the productivity and safety of people, processes, and systems with a B.S. in Industrial & Systems (ISE) Engineering degree from Liberty University. Apply what you learn in engineering science, system analysis, and engineering management and help communities find a better way of doing things.
The Institute of Industrial and Systems Engineers states that “Industrial and systems engineering is concerned with the design, improvement and installation of integrated systems of people, materials, information, equipment and energy.”
With this degree, you’ll be exposed to real-world problems and trained in areas like facilities design, quality assurance, ergonomics, and more. Prepare to work in a broad range of industries, including health care, logistics, manufacturing, and distribution, within the engineering field as you gain an understanding of the:
Solving problems using quantitative approaches to help others and improve processes
Application of management skills
Organization necessary to design, develop, implement, and optimize systems involving people, materials, information, equipment, and energy
Appropriate use of analytical, computational and experimental practices
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith. Our primary goal is to develop Christ-centered men and women with the values, knowledge, and skills needed to positively influence industrial and systems engineering related industries.
Coursework includes study in the more recently developed areas of Industrial Engineering enterprise such as:
Operations Research
Quality/Process Improvement
Human Factors
Production Systems and Engineering Management
Business Analytics and Business Intelligence
LUSOE Industrial & Systems Engineering Program is the only Christian ABET accredited I&SE program in the Country.
Accreditation
The Industrial and Systems Engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission(s) of ABET, under the General Criteria and the Program Criteria for Industrial and Systems and Similarly Named Engineering Programs.
Featured Courses
Intro. Ops. Res.: Deterministic Models (ENGI 340)
Intro. Ops. Res.: Probabilistic Models (ENGI 350)
Adv. Data Analysis & Machine Learning (ENGI 420)
Decision Analysis (ENGI 430)
Career Outlook*
Median pay $95,300 per year/$45.82 per hour
Number of Jobs: 301,000
*2021 stats from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
Career Opportunities in Industrial & Systems Engineering
Product Engineering
Process Engineering
Manufacturing Engineering
Supply Chain Engineering
Human Factors Engineering
Quality Assurance Engineering
Data Scientist
Engineering Management
Systems Engineering
Where Alumni Have Worked
Tessy Plastics
AMTI
BWXT
Framatome
Abbott"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/healthcare-informatics/","Use Technology to Serve Patients with Our BS in Health Informatics
Every year, the healthcare industry uses more technology to provide new patient care options and is forced to maintain even greater amounts of data. The complexity introduced by new technology adoption means that the health sciences industry faces new threats and challenges as the burden to keep patient data secure increases.
To meet these threats head-on, healthcare professionals need specialized experts to help solve technical problems in the health practice setting. Liberty University’s online Bachelor of Science in Health Informatics can help equip you with the blend of technology and health sciences skills you need to support both patients and healthcare professionals in the field.
At Liberty University, your success is our success. By pursuing your online bachelor’s degree in healthcare informatics at Liberty, you can receive the training you need for an exciting career in the healthcare industry.
Our healthcare informatics bachelor’s degree at Liberty University is offered 100% online, allowing you to remain active in your job, with your family, and in your community without the worry of having to take courses on campus. Our flexible online format helps you get the training you need to make a positive impact on the healthcare industry.
What is healthcare informatics?
The health informatics discipline uses a blend of information technology, communications, and healthcare administration to help health sciences organizations and patient care facilities run more effectively. From tracking patient data to find patterns and improve care, to finding better ways to protect the privacy and security of health records, health informatics specialists use their training in technology and healthcare practice to benefit patients and healthcare professionals. Liberty University’s health informatics program can help you get the training you need to enter this exciting field with confidence.
With specialized health informatics skills, you can solve technical problems and improve operations in many healthcare settings. The informatics discipline can help equip with the knowledge and skills needed to manage the relationship between information systems and people. This degree program integrates social sciences with information systems to evaluate complex information processing.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Health Informatics?
Our Bachelor of Science in Informatics – Healthcare Informatics online degree program offers you the opportunity to earn a respected medical informatics degree. You can learn from professionals with real-world experience in clinical and leadership settings. You can also dive into today’s healthcare medication administration and pharmacy terminology by analyzing the structure and organization of medical coding. 
Our online healthcare informatics degree is designed to help you pursue your passion. You want more than a career — you want to make an impact. With our healthcare informatics degree online, you can gain the knowledge and training you need to lead and impact tomorrow’s health systems.
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). A quality degree program from an accredited institution can help you be confident that the training and education you are receiving meets the highest level of academic standards. 
We are proud to help you pursue your passion by offering a healthcare informatics degree that is available 100% online. With this flexibility and freedom, you can remain active in your current schedule while working toward a better future. Obtain a degree that can help you serve others and increase the efficiency of the healthcare system at your hospital or clinic, and choose Liberty’s bachelor’s degree in health informatics.
Frequently Asked Questions
While researching online bachelors in health informatics management and specialist programs, you may have questions about how Liberty University’s online degree in health informatics can help you reach your career goals. Below are some common questions about earning a health informatics degree online.
Is health informatics in demand?
What is a health informatics specialist?
What can I do with a bachelor’s in health informatics?
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelors in Healthcare Informatics Online Degree?
Liberty’s online healthcare informatics degree was designed with your success in mind. As you pursue our clinical informatics degree, you can learn from professors who possess the same passion you have for this field of study. The faculty at Liberty have experience as business owners, district managers, project managers, controllers, management development instructors, and in nearly every specialty that the field of healthcare informatics touches in a clinical and administrative setting. 
Featured Courses
INFO 310 – Foundations of Pharmacology
INFO 320 – Healthcare Informatics
INFO 321 – Healthcare Coding and Classification
INFO 410 – Healthcare Enterprise Systems
Highlights of Pursuing Liberty’s Healthcare Informatics Degree Online
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You may be eligible to earn additional college credit through life experience.
This program is offered in an 8-week course format, with 8 different start dates each year, and no set login times!
While pursuing our B.S. in Healthcare Informatics degree online, you will have access to a wide variety of resources through Liberty’s research portal."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/engineering/bachelors/industrial-engineering-technology/","Help Your Organization Run Smoothly with Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Industrial Engineering Technology
Businesses compete globally and locally in the marketplace, each looking for an advantage over the competition. Therefore, they are always looking for ways to increase efficiency while simultaneously improving quality and profitability. Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Industrial Engineering Technology can help you prepare for a career where you are designing solutions for these problems in business or industrial environments.
This industrial engineering technology degree can prepare you for a future working as a member or leader of a technical team. You can learn how to design systems, components, and processes that meet specific needs within a broadly defined set of engineering problems. You can also gain the ability to conduct standard tests, measurements, experiments, and then analyze the results to improve performance
Please note: Senior-level courses for this program will be offered for the first time during the 2023-2024 academic year. For students enrolling in Fall 2021, this may extend your average completion time to 4 years instead of 3.5 years.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Industrial Engineering Technology Degree?
Liberty University’s B.S. in Industrial Engineering Technology can help you gain a broad spectrum of skills that may be applied to many different fields. This degree is also 100% online, so you can continue serving in your community while preparing for a brighter future in the engineering and quality control field.
With practical skills to help you utilize a plant’s workers and equipment to meet production goals, you can ensure that production stays on schedule and within budget. This is valuable for businesses because you can help identify defects or problems in their processes and offer solutions to fix them. This can save a company millions of dollars over the course of production, and it can be a very lucrative career. The median annual wage for industrial production managers was $108,790 in 2020.*
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at the Occupational Outlook Handbook, Industrial Production Managers (viewed online July 9, 2021). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor of Science in Industrial Engineering Technology Degree?
Our industrial engineering technology degree offers a broad scope of foundational knowledge that can prepare you for a career in the engineering field. Depending on your role, you must consider costs, human factors, and other principles of business management. You can take accounting, business, chemistry, math, and engineering courses covering these and other topics.
Another part of your studies will be technical communication, which can help you understand the 3 main types of technical writing: operational, promotional, and reportorial. Understanding how to evaluate and edit your documents depending on the audience is vital in maintaining clear communication. 
A large part of industrial engineering technology is refining business processes through rigorous data analysis. You can study Six Sigma to learn how to incorporate this valuable process improvement methodology into your organization’s operations. Upon graduation, you can be equipped to work effectively as a team member or leader in business or industrial engineering.
Featured Courses 
ENGE 205 – Electrical Systems
ENGI 307 – Data Analysis and Machine Learning
ENGI 330 – Facilities Design
ENGI 371 – Six Sigma, Lean, and Kaizen
Course guides coming soon
Highlights of Our Industrial Engineering Technology Bachelor’s Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online B.S. in Industrial Engineering Technology degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
This program is offered in an 8-week course format with 8 different start dates each year and no set login times!
You can have access to the latest technology and qualified faculty who seek to know you personally and provide you with opportunities for education, research, and training in a Christ-centered environment.
You can have the opportunity to synthesize your studies in a final capstone project that will cover planning and project management as well as execution and implementation."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/information-systems/accounting-systems/","Help Build Tomorrow’s Financial Systems with an Accounting Information Systems Degree
If you’re seeking an exciting career in business and technology, Liberty can help! Our 100% online B.S. in Information Systems (IS) – Accounting Information Systems degree will help you gain the technical expertise, business acumen, and interpersonal skills you need to succeed. You’ll learn how to design and manage information systems that collect, process, and store financial data.
Prepare to launch a career in one of the world’s fastest-growing industries. Whether you’re looking to switch career paths or enter the workforce for the first time, our accounting information systems (AIS) degree is a great option.
This program explores important leadership and communication techniques. You’ll also develop in-demand technical skills. That way, you can develop and manage effective accounting software for your business.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
What is an accounting information system (AIS)?
An AIS (accounting information system) is a computer system used to process accounting data. Companies of all sizes use these systems to store and record financial transactions. AIS professionals help design and oversee these systems so that businesses can keep track of data relating to invoices, inventory, revenue, financial statements, and more.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Accounting Systems Degree?
Prepare to launch your information systems career — without putting your life on hold.
At Liberty, we are dedicated to excellence and integrity. Our accounting information systems classes are taught by seasoned faculty with years of real-world business experience. By learning from these industry experts, you can gain valuable skills and insider tips that will help set you apart from the competition.
Earn a degree that fits your schedule. Liberty’s accounting information systems degree program is available 100% online — and with no set login times. You can complete your coursework from anywhere in the world, without having to relocate or take time off from work to attend classes on campus. The best part? You’ll have the freedom to stay invested in your family and career while completing your degree!
Liberty has been a pioneer in distance learning since 1985. A lot has changed since then, but our commitment to Training Champions for Christ has not. All of our courses integrate biblical principles with professional knowledge, so you can lead in your industry with integrity. You’ll be equipped to make business decisions that are both financially and ethically sound.
Frequently Asked Questions
What is a B.S. in Accounting Information Systems degree?
What’s the difference between accounting information systems and accounting information technology?
What is the average accounting information systems salary?
What Will You Learn in Our Accounting Information Systems Courses?
Develop the technical, management, and accounting skills needed to launch your AIS career.
Throughout this program, you’ll learn how to create and manage financial information systems. With this knowledge, you can use technology to solve business problems and discover more efficient ways to handle your company’s data.
This degree includes several core IS courses. You’ll explore topics like business law, managerial accounting, application programming, web architecture, system design and analysis, and IS project management. By gaining foundational knowledge in these areas, you can develop a diverse skill set that will be useful in a variety of jobs.
Our AIS training includes a multidisciplinary approach to business, accounting, and information technology. Within the AIS cognate, you’ll take auditing and accounting courses and explore how accounting information systems function in today’s business world.
AIS systems play a vital role in helping business owners make informed decisions and streamline operations. By learning how to carry out IT audits and launch new IS processes, you can help your company manage every aspect of its accounting data — including balance sheets, bookkeeping software, bank reconciliations, and more!
Featured Courses
ACCT 301 – Intermediate Financial Accounting I
ACCT 332 – Accounting and Control
ACCT 404 – Assurance and Attestation
ACCT 432 – IT Audit
Highlights of Liberty’s Information Systems Accounting and IT Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our bachelor’s in accounting information systems is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
You can complete this online AIS degree in under 4 years!
Our accounting information systems courses are only 8 weeks long, with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
After completing this IS and accounting degree, you’ll be eligible to pursue certifications in Cisco, Java, and more!
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/information-systems/","Residential Information Systems Program
Play a critical role in shaping the future of business with a Bachelor of Science in Information Systems (IS) degree from Liberty University.
Through our program, you will become grounded with a Christian worldview and gain an understanding of emerging information systems and technology, leadership, and teamwork. You will also complete a capstone that solves problems in the industry. Recent projects have developed a programming interface that heightens business intelligence.
Get ready for a rewarding career in the design and implementation of technology. You’ll be equipped to help organizations gain a competitive advantage through the development of innovative strategies.
With this degree, you’ll study topics like:
Data Analytics
Database Management
Networking and Telecommunications
Mobile Programming
Information Technology Strategy
The B.S. in Information Systems degree is also offered online.
Academics: B.S. in Information Systems
Admission Requirements
View Liberty’s undergraduate admissions requirements
Featured Hospitality Management Courses
Introduction to Information Sciences and Systems (CSIS 100)
Business Data Communication Systems (CSIS 330)
System Analysis and Design (CSIS 351)
Career Opportunities in Information Systems
Application analyst
Computer Systems Analyst
Database Administrator
Network Engineer
Web & Mobile Developer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/information-systems/database/","Residential Database Program
Prepare to meet industry demands with a Bachelor of Science in Information Systems – Database degree. With a database degree cognate, you’ll get the skills you need to provide support in business, organization, and government settings.
As you focus on programming languages and other tools used in networks and management, you’ll gain an understanding of the design and management of overall data networks and systems. And by earning a database degree cognate from a Christian university, you’ll learn from experienced faculty who teach from a Christian perspective. 
After graduation, you’ll be ready to make a positive impact on businesses and organizations by developing, deploying, and managing database and information systems.
The B.S. in IS: Database degree is also offered online
Academics: Database Cognate
Featured Database Courses
Object-Oriented Programming (CSIS 212)
Introduction to Oracle (CSIS 327)
Advanced Oracle (CSIS 328)
Web Enterprise Technologies (CSIS 410)
Career Opportunities in Information Systems – Database
Database Administrator
Database Analyst
Database Developer
Data Management Specialist"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/information-systems/","Combine Your Interests in Business and Technology with an Information Systems Online Degree
Do you enjoy figuring out problems? Are you interested in technology and the way it interacts with people to create smooth processes? If so, then an information systems (IS) degree may be for you! 
Liberty’s online bachelor’s in information systems degree is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our information systems degree online will provide the training you need to increase your proficiency in the field. By earning this degree, you will increase your professional market value. We offer 5 areas of study to our IS students, allowing you to personalize your degree to meet your career goals.
You will receive advanced preparation in Cisco, Java, and Oracle. With these skills, your information systems degree is sure to be a valuable asset on your résumé.
Information Systems vs Information Technology
If you’re wondering if information systems and information technology are the same then, we might be able to help! Although the two are related, there is a distinct difference.
Information systems is an overarching field that deals with technology, people, and processes. Professionals in this field are looking at the whole picture. They ensure that each unique part of the system is working with the others in a fluid, cohesive way.
Information technology deals specifically with the technology within the system. These professionals handle design, development, and maintenance of technology. They ensure that the technology is playing its part effectively and correctly within the whole system.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree of Information Systems?
With our information systems degree online, we strive to provide you with applied knowledge of technology. This IS degree focuses on the information side of the information technology industry. Our professors will teach you how computer technology can be optimized to provide maximum benefit for your business.
This program will provide you with a firm foundation in using technology to enhance business processes. A combination of quality professor interaction with leading tools and methods will help you achieve invaluable knowledge in the field. 
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/information-systems/data-networking/","Residential Data Networking Program
Prepare for a successful career in data networking by earning a Bachelor of Science in Information Systems – Data Networking degree from a Christian university. With a data networking degree, you’ll gain essential skills in business, technology management, and computer science.
Gain practical experience working with networking languages and management as you learn the foundational principles of Information Systems and Data Networking.
By studying data networking at Liberty, you’ll learn from experienced faculty who teach from a Christian perspective. And you’ll be trained to be a leader in your industry as you apply technology management skills in the business, organization, and government sectors.
The B.S. in IS: Data Networking degree is also offered online.
Academics: Data Networking Cognate
Featured Data Networking Courses
Networks (CSIS 331)
Network Security (CSIS 335)
System Analysis & Design (CSIS 351)
Advanced Networking and Communication Systems (CSIS 430)
Career Opportunities in Data Networking
Data Communications Analyst
Network Technician or Engineer
IT Manager/Systems Administrator
Information Assurance Analyst
Computer Security Specialist
Database Administrator
Information Researcher
User Support Specialist
Information Systems Manager"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/information-systems/database/","Design Effective Data Networks with an Online Database Management Degree
Are you seeking a rewarding career with a promising industry outlook? Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science in Information Systems – Database can help equip you to pursue many job opportunities in the world of business and technology. You can learn how to develop and manage effective databases and corporate information systems (IS).
Almost all organizations rely on data networks to manage information and handle digital transactions. By earning this IS degree, you can prepare for an exciting career in business, education, healthcare, or criminal justice, among other industries! Our database specialization is designed to help meet the need for professionals who can implement and oversee efficient databases in the marketplace.
Partner with us and train to become a Champion for Christ in your personal and professional life.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Who uses databases?
What do database administrators do?
Is database administration a good career?
How long does it take to become a database administrator?
What skills do database administrators need?
How do you become a database administrator?
Why Choose Liberty’s Database Management Degree Online?
Whether you are currently working in IS management or looking to switch career paths, our online bachelor’s in information systems can help you stand out as an ethical, competent professional. In this program, you’ll receive real-world training that can equip you with essential business and tech skills.
To fulfill our mission of Training Champions for Christ, our curriculum is taught through the lens of a biblical worldview. That way, you can learn how to integrate ethical standards with industry best practices. At Liberty, you won’t just get a degree — you’ll study under professors who have years of experience in database information management. Our faculty are ready and eager to share their expertise with you and provide the academic support you need to graduate career-ready.
Liberty has been a pioneer in distance learning since 1985. A lot has changed since then, but our dedication to providing top-notch programs that are accessible, affordable, and high-quality has not. Our B.S. in Information Systems is offered 100% online, and the classes have no set login times. You can stay invested in the things that really matter — like your family, job, church, and community — while still attending database management and administration school online.
What Will You Learn in Our Database Management Classes?
Learn how to leverage information technology and human capital to accomplish business goals.
In this program, you’ll explore the core principles of database management as you learn how to support companies in business, nonprofit, and government settings. Upon graduation, you can pursue jobs related to the development and management of data systems.
Liberty’s B.S. in Information Systems – Database is broken down into 2 main parts: core IS courses and the database specialization. You will explore foundational concepts related to business and IS, including financial accounting, business law, data communication systems, information security, project management, and system analysis and design.
Our courses can also help you gain the knowledge you need to take various certification exams. By pursuing certifications, you can potentially increase your marketability and demonstrate your expertise to employers.
The goal of this degree is to give you both the technical know-how and the leadership skills needed to oversee IS projects within a business. You can learn how to use industry-essential tools, such as Cisco and Java. The database specialization provides targeted training in web enterprise technologies and object-oriented programming. With this knowledge, you can train to become a leader in your field and find new ways to meet the needs of your organization.
Featured Courses
CSIS 212 – Object-Oriented Programming
CSIS 332 – Database Programming
CSIS 410 – Web Enterprise Technologies
CSIS 473 – IS Project Management
Highlights of Liberty’s Database Administration Degree Online
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online bachelor’s degree in database administration from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our database administrator degree is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
This online degree in database management can be completed in under 4 years.
Our online courses are only 8 weeks long with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
You’ll have the opportunity to network with leaders in information systems and database management from across the country.
You can access a wealth of resources through Liberty’s top-notch research portal while completing our database courses online.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Database Administrators (viewed online September 10, 2020). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth."
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/information-systems/global-studies/","Residential Information Systems – Global Studies Program
Develop the skills you need to serve in a technology role in the mission field. With the Bachelor of Science in Information Services – Global Studies degree, you’ll gain the latest technological skills along with a thorough grounding in the functional areas of business.
Learn from experienced faculty members who are grounded in their faith and teach from a Christian perspective.
With the Information Services: Global Studies degree, you’ll gain a solid foundation in business and technology. Prepare to effectively apply information technology to improve business processes across a broad spectrum of disciplines.
Academics: Global Studies Cognate
Featured Global Studies Courses
Intercultural Communication and Engagement (GLST 220)
Cultural Anthropology (GLST 290)
World Religions (RLGN 350 )
Career Preparations for Global Workers (GLST 385)
Career Opportunities for Global Studies Graduates
Network Administrator
Database Administrator
System Analyst
Java Developer
Web Developer
Systems Security Analyst
Information Assurance Analyst"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/information-systems/information-assurance/","Residential Information Assurance Program
Strategically position yourself for success in the cyber security field with a Bachelor of Science in Information Systems – Information Assurance degree.
Information Assurance is an interdisciplinary field that requires knowledge of accounting, business, fraud, information science, systems and security engineering, and criminology. Throughout the program, you will be given foundational knowledge in all of these areas as well as in statistics, management principles, IS hardware and software, and macroeconomics.
Designed to prepare you for a successful career, our program teaches you how to ensure the integrity and confidentiality of information systems with your organization.
Learn from professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and share your passion for the cyber security field.
The B.S. in IS: Information Assurance degree is also offered online
Academics: Information Assurance Cognate
Featured Information Assurance Courses
Network Security (CSIS 335)
Information Security Planning (CSIS 341)
Cyber Security (CSIS 343)
Digital Forensics (CSIS 440)
Career Opportunities in Information Assurance
Information Assurance Analyst
Computer Security Specialist
Database Administration
Information Researcher
User Support Specialist
Information Systems Manager"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/information-systems/data-networking/","Learn to Solve Data Management Problems with Our Online B.S. in Information Systems – Data Networking Degree
Liberty University’s online Bachelor of Science in Information Systems – Data Networking degree can help equip you for the future of information technology and systems management. Our online B.S. in data networking degree will teach you how to apply technology management skills to business, government, and nonprofit organizations. 
Our online B.S. in I.S. – Data Networking degree is designed to prepare you for a rewarding career while offering you flexibility. At Liberty, you can complete your degree on your own schedule.
What is data networking? 
Most organizations rely on communication networks to transmit sensitive information through operating systems. Data and computer networking are key components of the technology infrastructure within these organizations. In managing an organization’s data network, you will organize, install, and maintain the data communication systems.
Network architecture requires reliability and scalability as well as frequent upgrades and repairs to ensure the system’s operational effectiveness. Our graduates are uniquely prepared to thrive in these roles. If you want to be a network administrator or a network engineer, this degree may be the right fit for you.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
Why Choose Liberty’s Online B.S. in Information Systems – Data Networking Degree?
Are you looking for a rewarding career with a promising industry outlook? Our online bachelor’s in information systems – data and software networking degree can help you make a positive impact on businesses. Learn to develop and deploy secure data network systems and manage corporate information systems. 
Our online data networking program can provide you with an accredited degree from a top-ranked university. Our bachelor’s degree in data networking can help you pursue marketable professional certifications in industry-essential tools, like Cisco and Java.
We offer our bachelor’s degree in data networking online so that you can earn a quality education while staying connected with your job, family, church, and community. Liberty University is one of the largest private, nonprofit universities in the nation and the largest university in Virginia. While pursuing your data networking degree, you will have access to an abundance of IT resources that can help further your knowledge and certifications.
What Will You Learn in Our Online B.S. in Information Systems – Data Networking Degree Program?
Liberty University’s online B.S. in data networking will provide you with essential training in business, technology management, and computer science. This degree places an emphasis on computer systems analysis, networking languages, and management skills needed for many industries.
You will also complete requirements for several professional certifications as part of this degree. These include the Cisco Certified Network Associate (CCNA) exam and the CompTIA A+ (CompTIA) exam.
Featured Courses
CSIS 331 – Networks
CSIS 335 – Network Security
CSIS 341 – Information Security Planning
CSIS 430 – Advanced Networking and Communication Systems
Highlights of Liberty’s Online Data Networking Bachelor’s Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can complete our online B.S. in Information Systems – Data Networking degree in as little as 3.5 years.
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
You may be eligible to earn additional credit through life experience.
This online data networking bachelor’s degree holds program accreditation through the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
As an online student, you will have the opportunity to network with experts in data networking and information systems from across the country.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/information-technology/","Residential Information Technology (IT) Program
Prepare for an exciting career at the forefront of emerging technologies across all industries with a Bachelor of Science in Information Technology (IT).
With this degree, you’ll study topics like:
Software, mobile, and web development
Cybersecurity
Cloud computing
Database design
Networking and telecommunications
System administration
User experience design
Through this program, you will develop a foundation in leadership and teamwork within the context of a Christian worldview. This will enable you to develop IT services, software, and systems that meet the needs of an increasingly connected world. Successful graduates will become equipped to design and implement innovative IT solutions and develop sustainable IT strategies that help organizations gain competitive advantages.
The program includes a capstone project that focuses on building solutions to current problems facing the industry. Recent projects include programming a portable security application that discovers system vulnerabilities and the development of a cloud application that leverages artificial intelligence to make informed decisions.
Academics: Information Technology (IT)
Featured Information Technology Courses
Web Architecture and Development (CSIS 310)
Studies in Information Security (CSIS 340)
Intro to Human-Computer Interaction (CSIS 375)
Enterprise Systems & Integration (CSIS 474)
Object-Oriented Programming (CSIS 212)
Hardware and Software (CSIS 320)
Career Opportunities in Information Technology
Software Developer
Database Administrator
Network Engineer
Systems Administrator
Web and Mobile Developer
Cisco Networking Academy
Achieve valuable industry certifications through our partnerships with leading organizations like Cisco Networking Academy.
Learn more about Cisco Networking Academy."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/information-technology/","Launch Your Career in IT with a Bachelor of Science in Information Technology Degree from Liberty University
With the rise of the Information Age and the explosion of digital technology, individuals with expertise in information technology (IT) have experienced booming career opportunities. And the industry hasn’t stopped growing! Prepare to join one of the most fast-paced, ever-evolving job fields with a bachelor’s degree in information technology from Liberty University.
Apply Now Request Info
Our Bachelor of Science (BS) in Information Technology can help provide the skill set you need to pursue a variety of information technology careers. By earning a degree in information technology, you can prepare for positions in software development, computer programming, IT support, computer forensics, information security, and computer networks. You could work in settings ranging from businesses to hospitals to IT consulting companies. A degree in information technology can open up a world of possibilities.
Not only are you becoming equipped for more job options with a degree in information technology, but you are also preparing to enter a field that forecasts consistent growth. The Bureau of Labor Statistics projects that computer and information technology occupations will grow 13% from 2020 to 2030, which is faster than the average for all occupations.* With the rapid growth of the IT field, now is the perfect time to turn your passion for technology into a financially rewarding career.
With Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science in Information Technology degree, you can help meet the growing need for information technology professionals in the workforce. You can learn how to identify, address, and determine technology solutions while taking on real-world projects in your field. Partner with us and get the credentials you need to navigate the ever-changing world of information technology.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Computer and Information Technology Occupations (viewed online Jan. 24, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
With flexible, 8-week courses and no set login times
So you can tailor your degree to your unique goals
Earn your IT degree in just 3.5 years
What Is Information Technology (IT)?
The term “information technology” refers to the use of networks, databases, and computer systems to store, retrieve, and transmit data. IT allows people and businesses to effectively manage electronic data and information, and IT professionals are responsible for creating, maintaining, and overseeing these systems.
IT jobs are very prolific because they stretch across many different fields – from healthcare to communication and beyond.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online BS in Information Technology?
By pursuing your BS in Information Technology degree online at Liberty, you will receive access to a wealth of resources while still maintaining the flexibility you need to stay involved in your job, family, and community. Our 8-week courses, 100% online format, and no set login times give you the freedom to earn your degree on your schedule – so you can pursue your goals without putting your life on hold.
Join an award-winning program led by industry experts who are committed to helping you lead with excellence and integrity. Liberty’s online degree in information technology is taught by dedicated faculty with years of real-world experience and advanced degrees in related areas of study. With their guidance, you can gain an insider’s look at the industry and develop marketable skills that could help you stand out to employers.
Additionally, our online information technology degree gives you the opportunity to select a specialization that best fits your unique interests and goals. Available specializations include application and database development, data networking and security, gaming design, and web and mobile programming. Each of these online information technology degree specializations can provide you with in-depth study in an area that interests you.
It’s our mission to provide you with the cutting-edge tools, training, and information you need to succeed in your career – and we do that by staying up-to-date on all technological advancements. By partnering with us for your BS in Information Technology, you can learn about the current trends and challenges facing today’s IT professionals and gain an edge over the competition."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/information-systems/information-assurance/","Protect Your Company’s Data with an Information Systems Assurance Degree
Do you love working with people and computers? Are you seeking an exciting, lucrative career in a booming industry? Does the field of cybersecurity fascinate you?
If you answered “yes” to any of these questions, then Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science in Information Systems (IS) – Information Assurance (IA) degree may be for you! Our program will train you to protect the integrity and confidentiality of information systems within organizations. You can learn how to manage security networks that keep your company’s data safe.
Through this online degree in information assurance IT, you can gain practical skills that could help boost your marketability. Partner with us and prepare to lead with excellence and integrity in the workplace.
Among only 3% of business schools worldwide to receive ACBSP accreditation
What is information assurance?
Companies of all sizes need to safeguard their information and manage risk factors related to the storage and transmission of important data. Information assurance professionals work to protect the integrity and authenticity of user data, in both physical and electronic forms. They ensure that only authorized individuals gain access to given sets of information.
Our information assurance degree combines technical training with business management concepts. You can prepare to help your organization develop effective security measures using best practices in risk management, system safety, computer architecture, and fraud examination.
Why Choose Liberty University’s Information Systems Program?
At Liberty, we seek to Train Champions for Christ. In keeping with this mission, we’ve designed our online programs with your success in mind. We offer flexible courses, affordable tuition rates, and practical training that can help equip you for the real world. Whether you’re looking to launch a new career or enter the job market for the first time, we can help.
Choosing Liberty means choosing…
Flexibility | Our Bachelor of Science in Information Systems – Information Assurance degree is offered 100% online, and the classes have no set login times. You can complete your coursework whenever and wherever it’s best for you — even from the comfort of your home! If you’re a full-time parent or working professional, we offer the flexibility you need to pursue your degree without putting your life on hold.
Respected Credentials | Liberty’s online bachelor’s in information security is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). You can be confident that your degree has met rigorous academic standards and accreditation requirements.
Experienced Faculty | In this information assurance program, you’ll study under professors who have years of experience working in business, technology, and cybersecurity. They can help you develop the knowledge and skills needed to protect your company’s most valuable asset: its information.
Networking Opportunities | As an online Liberty student, you’ll get to network with other students, faculty, alumni, and professionals in the field of information systems. Building your network is a valuable way to jumpstart your career and expand your career options!
Biblical Principles | At Liberty, we strive to live out Christ-like characteristics and use the power of faith and education to transform people and the world. We won’t just help you get a degree — we can help you integrate ethical principles with professional knowledge so you can stand out as a person of integrity in the workplace.
Frequently Asked Questions
What is a B.S. in Information Systems degree?
What are the benefits of earning an information systems degree?
Is information assurance a good career?
What can you do with a bachelor’s degree in information assurance IT?
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Information Assurance Program?
As an information assurance professional, you’ll need to possess skills in many different fields, including accounting, business, information science, criminology, and security engineering. Our program can help equip you with the knowledge you need to enter the job market with confidence.
Some of the topics covered in this program include management, business law, programming, information security, web architecture, macroeconomics, and IS project management. You can develop a variety of hard and soft skills so you can effectively manage people and technology in your company.
Within the information assurance specialization, you’ll dive into cybersecurity, digital forensics, and network security. You can also learn how to develop and implement effective information security programs. Our business courses can help you ensure that your company complies with the law and keeps costs down.
After completing this IS program, you could take various examinations for certifications. That way, you can further boost your résumé and demonstrate your expertise to employers. Our final capstone course provides the opportunity to gain hands-on experience through a real-world project.
Featured Courses
CSIS 335 – Network Security
CSIS 341 – Information Security Planning
CSIS 343 – Cybersecurity
Highlights of Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Information Systems
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
Our bachelor’s degree in information assurance is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). Our School of Business is among only 3% of business schools worldwide to earn ACBSP accreditation.
The courses in this program are only 8 weeks long with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
Pursue potential college credit for life experience through our Experience Plus program.
As an online Liberty student, you can access a wealth of resources through our top-notch research portal.
If you want to further your education at the graduate level, you may want to pursue one of our online master’s programs.
Check out our other cybersecurity degree programs! You can also visit our B.S. in Information Systems page to see if any of our other specializations interest you."
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/information-technology/application-and-database-development/","Residential Application & Database Development Program
Position yourself for success in the expanding field of advanced information technology with a Bachelor of Science in Information Technology – Application and Database Development degree.
Learn from experienced faculty who are grounded in their faith. They will help you develop skills in computer programming, databases, distributed computing, human-computer interaction, information security, and more.
Here, you’ll also complete the Oracle Workforce Development curriculum for the Oracle Certified Associates (OCA) certification in the database.
As a graduate, you will be equipped to meet the growing need for application and database developers who are ready to take on challenging real-world projects.
The B.S. in IT: Application & Database Development degree is also offered online
Academics: Application & Database Development Cognate
In addition to the required core classes on the program of study, each student is required to complete various core classes that specialize in Information Technology.
Featured Application & Database Development Courses
C# Programming (CSIS 209)
Introduction to Oracle (CSIS 327)
Advanced Oracle (CSIS 328)
Web Enterprise Technologies (CSIS 410)
Application & Database Development Career Opportunities
Application Designer
Applications Developer
Database Analyst
Database Administrator
Software Programmer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/information-technology/data-networking-security/","Residential IT Data Networking & Security Program
Equip yourself with critical skills in this quickly expanding field with a Bachelor of Science in Information Technology – Data Networking & Security degree. Learn from industry leaders and apply your knowledge with hands-on projects and real-world application.
As a part of the program, you will complete the Cisco Netacademy curriculum for the Cisco Certified Network Associate (CCNA) certification. Gain skills in computer programming, cyber security, databases, distributed computing, human-computer interaction, network security, and more.
All courses are taught from a biblical worldview, and you will graduate ready to meet the growing demand in this field for data network and security administrators.
The B.S. in IT: Data Networking & Security degree is also offered online
Designation
The Department of Homeland Security and National Security Agency have designated Liberty University as a National Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Education for the B.S. in Information Technology with Data Networking and Security Cognate.
Academics: Data Networking & Security Cognate
In addition to the required core classes on the program of study, each student is required to complete various core classes that specialize in Information Technology.
Featured Data Networking & Security Courses
Networks (CSIS 331)
Network Security (CSIS 335)
Information Security Planning (CSIS 341)
Advanced Networking and Communication Systems (CSIS 430)
Career Opportunities in Data Networking & Security 
Network Administrator
Network Security Manager
Security Analyst
Security Auditor
Systems Administrator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/information-technology/data-networking-and-security/","Innovate Security Solutions with Our Bachelor’s Degree in Information Technology – Data Networking and Security
Do you want to be the go-to expert for network security in your business? Liberty University’s online information technology degree can help equip you with the knowledge and skills you need to lead with excellence and integrity in the expanding field of IT. Through our 100% online bachelor’s in information technology degree program, you can learn how to identify and address security problems, determine solutions, and take on real-world projects in the field of data networking and security.
What is information technology network security?
Whether a local network inside a business, or a worldwide network spanning countries, any computer network needs security to protect it from intruders. Gaining expertise in data networking and security can help you address this need in your business or start a new career in information technology.
Using special tools and enhanced security technology, you can learn to help build efficient databases and computer systems, identify and address weaknesses in security, and prevent attacks on a computer network. Liberty’s BS degree in information security can help you gain the skills you need to step into this critical role.
Our Bachelor of Science in Information Technology is designed to challenge you to grow and provide you with quality training from experienced industry professionals. Technology is a vital part of growth for organizations. With our online computer networking degree, you too can become an integral part of nearly any business with the skills you learn at Liberty.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Computer Networking Degree – Information Technology and Security?
Our purpose in creating a bachelor’s degree in data networking and security is to develop information technology (IT) professionals with a Christian worldview.
Through our online computer networking degree, you can learn about the effective and efficient convergence of information technology and business processes. This online networking degree can also teach you how to design relevant IT systems using methods that are consistent with business objectives. 
Our bachelor of IT in security and networking degree online consists of courses designed to prepare you to become an asset to any team you are a part of. These classes can help prepare you to take the A+ certification through the Computing Technology Industry Association. The exam tests the competency of entry-level PC service professionals in installing, maintaining, customizing, and operating personal computers.
In step with the mission of Liberty University, the faculty who teach our IT networking bachelor degree seek to help you develop the values, knowledge, and skills you need to design effective IT solutions based upon industry best practices.
Designations
Liberty University has been designated a National Security Agency and Department of Homeland Security Center of Academic Excellence for Cyber Defense Education (NSA/DHS CAE-CDE) for the Bachelor of Science in Information Technology with Data Networking and Security specialization.
Common Questions
While researching the best schools to take data networking classes online, you may have questions about how an online network IT degree can help you meet your goals. As a leader in higher education, we believe that our online computer networking degree offers you tremendous benefits. Below are some common questions about Liberty University’s information technology degree.
Can I find a good job with this IT degree?
Why is networking part of information technology?
Should I concentrate on networking or database for information technology?
Why is information technology networking important to business?
What Will You Learn in Our IT Security and Data Networking Degree?
There is a growing need for IT workers, and this online data networking and security degree program can help you successfully fill that need. Classes within our security and networking degree track provide training on a variety of technical skills you need to be successful.
The Information Security Planning class can help teach you how to create an information security program and implement that program into a system. 
Network Security studies the control of unwanted intrusions into a computer network, how to plan for these intrusions, and how to prevent them.
The program’s Cyber-Security course covers the essential topics of the field from the Official (ISC) 2 SSCP Certified Body of Knowledge as well as the 7 domains reviewed within the System Security Certified Practitioner certification.
Under the guidance of professors who teach challenging and updated content, you can use our degree to transition smoothly into your career. An online bachelor of information technology – network security degree from Liberty can help you feel prepared for nearly any IT task.
Highlights of Our Online Information Technology Degree 
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online Bachelor of Science in Information Technology degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can complete our online data networking, security, and computer networking in information technology in as little as 3.5 years.
See the Online Cybersecurity Degree Program page for information about similar degrees at Liberty.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/information-technology/application-and-database-development/","Prepare for Success with Liberty’s Application and Database Development Degree
Do you want to use code to solve business problems and create new products? Liberty University’s 100% online B.S. in Information Technology – Application and Database Development degree can equip you with the knowledge and skills you need to be successful in the expanding and highly technical field of information technology.
In our online bachelor’s degree in IT – application and database development program, you can learn the programming skills you need to be on the cutting edge of innovation in business technology development and consumer software design.
The need for safety and security means that good database design is often even more important than the app itself for the success of businesses. Liberty’s B.S. in Information Technology – Application and Database Development can help you have a cbalance of programming and design skills for both sides of this equation so you can be ready to take advantage of more opportunities in your career.
What is Database Development?
Using programming to build a new app is a straight-forward process, but why would you need to develop a database? Businesses and organizations need efficient and effective database systems to handle data for sales, records, or any kind of information.
Most Software As A Service (SAAS) companies build both a useful and powerful consumer app and a fast and secure database system to support the app. But any company or organization that has a product or service will need to safely and securely store information with a robust database solution.
How to Become a Database Developer
Earn a Bachelor’s Degree in Application and Database Development from Liberty University.*
Learn programming languages, web and app development skills, and database management skills.
Write code and develop your own applications and database processes.
Learn soft skills in essential areas for professional success: analytical skills, critical thinking, creativity, interpersonal skills, problem-solving, and develop a strong foundation in ethics.
Gain hands-on experience through an information technology developer internship. Learn industry skills to fit the needs of your role better.
Create a portfolio of your work and a resume that demonstrates your industry skills, degree, experience, and certifications.
Apply for Database Developer roles.
Consider pursuing a master’s degree for advanced roles and leadership positions.
*While earning certificates in specific industry skills for database and application development can help you start your career, you could have more career opportunities with a full bachelor’s degree. Liberty University’s B.S. in Application and Database Development is designed to help you prepare to earn professional certifications in IT skill areas while also covering broader topics and preparing you for more potential roles.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online B.S. in Information Technology – Application and Database Development Degree?
With award-winning technology training and a faculty of computer science professionals, Liberty’s B.S. in Information Technology can help you build toward a successful career. At Liberty, we are dedicated to your success. We train professionals who lead with excellence and integrity. 
Our bachelor’s in application and database development degree will give you the skill set you need to meet the challenges information technology presents to businesses as well as help innovate solutions. Our online database development classes are taught by professors who have real-world experience in the field, and they will help you integrate biblical principles into your professional life.
With our online IT – application and database development degree, you will have the tools you need for a successful career with an eternal impact. Partner with us and let us help you become a Champion for Christ.
Liberty’s Online Information Technology Degree Awards
AffordableColleges.com ranked our Bachelor of Science in Information Technology degree on their list of top 50 Most Affordable Online Bachelor’s in Information Technology.
AffordableColleges.com ranked our B.S. in Information Technology – Web Development degree as the #1 Most Affordable Online Bachelor’s Degree in Web Development.
Frequently Asked Questions
While researching database administrator degrees and app development courses online, you may have questions about how Liberty University’s information technology degrees can help you meet your career goals. Below are some common questions about online app development and data management degrees:
What industries use databases?
How much does a database developer make?
What Will You Learn in Our Information Technology – Application and Database Development Degree?
Our application and database development online bachelor’s degree program will help you understand the convergence of information technology and business processes so you can design innovative IT systems consistent with business needs. Through this app development degree, you will study how to build a database, application development, and programming languages.
Your online database design classes will cover topics like database programming, C# planning, and new and emerging technologies. On top of gaining a quality online IT degree, your database technology courses will help you develop a network of professors and peers within your field.
Additionally, classes within our online IT bachelor’s degree will help prepare you to take the A+ certification through the Computing Technology Industry Association and refine your programming skills while learning advanced concepts.
Featured Courses
CSIS 209 – C# Programming
CSIS 325 – Database Management Systems
CSIS 333 – Advanced Database Programming*
CSIS 410 – Web Enterprise Technologies
*course guide coming soon
Highlights of Our B.S. in IT – Application and Database Development Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online information technology degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Learn database app development skills hands-on with online interactive labs and practical assignments.
You can complete this online information technology degree in as little as 3.5 years.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/information-technology/gaming-design/","Residential Gaming Design Program
Launch your career in the video game industry with a Bachelor of Science in Information Technology – Gaming Design degree.
Get the technical skills you need for success from experienced faculty who are grounded in their Christian faith. At Liberty University, you’ll have state-of-the-art classroom and computing facilities where you can gain experiential learning.
Modern game creation is a production effort involving expertise in sound, graphics, coding, story development, testing, and most importantly, imagination.
In this exciting field, you’ll study areas like:
Interactive game development
Digital imaging
3D graphics
Software programming
Mobile and web development
Software development and mechanics are at the heart of gaming design. Our Gaming Design cognate will introduce you to the modern object-oriented languages of Python, Java, and C#. This degree program is unique in that it combines software development training with graphic arts and interactive game design.
While you learn computer science skills in-depth, you’ll gain a diversity of skills with Liberty University’s B.S. in Information Technology – Gaming Design degree. Potential careers are in web development, software application design, or graphic arts.
The B.S. in IT: Gaming Design degree is also offered online
Academics: Gaming Design Cognate
In addition to the required core classes on the program of study, each student is required to complete various core classes that specialize in Information Technology.
Featured Gaming Design Courses
Introduction to Graphic Design (ARTS 222)
Digital Imaging (ARTS 342)
Introduction to 3D Graphics (ARTS 473)
Interactive Game Development (ARTS 474)
Career Opportunities in Gaming Design
Creative Director
Graphics Director
Mobile User Interface Designer
Software Programmer
Video Game Designer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/business/bachelors/information-technology/web-mobile-programming/","Residential IT Web & Mobile Programming Program
Position yourself to meet the growing need for skilled web developers with a Bachelor of Science in Information Technology – Web and Mobile Programming degree from Liberty University.
Study in state-of-the-art classrooms and computing facilities and learn from experienced faculty who are grounded in their faith.
With the B.S. in Information Technology degree, you’ll get training in many different areas including:
Software development
Database management
Networking
System administration
Internet architecture
User interface design
With the Web and Mobile Programming cognate, you’ll learn client and server-side programming as well as programming for the web and mobile devices. This cognate is unique to other IT cognates in that it focuses on software and content development for the web ecosystem. The Web and Mobile cognate will equip you with the skills and knowledge you need for success in developing applications in the web and mobile marketplace.
The B.S. in IT: Web and Mobile Programming degree is also offered online
Academics: Web & Mobile Programming Cognate
In addition to the required core classes on the program of study, each student is required to complete various core classes that specialize in Information Technology.
Featured Web & Mobile Programming Courses
Web Architecture & Development (CSIS 310)
Client-Side Programming (CSIS 315)
Server-Side Programming (CSIS 316)
Web and Mobile Programming (CSIS 408)
Career Opportunities in Web & Mobile Programming
Applications Developer
Front End Web Developer
User Interface Analyst
Software Programmer
Web Developer"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/information-technology/gaming-design/","Enter the Exciting Field of Gaming Design with Liberty’s Video Game Designer Degree
You want more than the typical 9 to 5 job. You want to spend every day doing what you love. Imagine doing just that while using your passion for gaming to create fun for others in a field you thrive in. By pursuing a game design degree, you can develop the technical skills you need to achieve all of this and more.
The evolution of gaming has changed the world. Gaming is used to teach people of all ages new ways to socialize, strategize, complete tasks, and work as a team. Parents use online games as learning platforms for their children, while teens and young adults can develop motor and social skills while having fun. There are even games that can serve as therapy for the elderly. 
From classic video game systems to games on your phone, the gaming industry plays a big part in our society today. If you are looking for a career with high impact and unlimited room for creativity, then a video game designer degree is the degree for you. 
Liberty’s information technology – gaming design degree can give you the programming and design skills you need to join the exciting and evolving game design industry. These skills can also be applied to a variety of other creative and technical professionals, as well. With so many new opportunities in this rapidly growing job market, now is the time to jump in. Turn your passion into a career with Liberty’s online game design degree!"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/interdisciplinary-research/","Design Your Own Research-Focused Program with an Online Bachelor’s in Interdisciplinary Research Degree 
These days, many traditional disciplines that used to be confined to 1 area of study may need to be combined in order for you to be successful in various fields. There are greater demands for people who are interdisciplinary in their skill set. That’s why Liberty’s Bachelor of Science (B.S.) in Interdisciplinary Research is customizable, allowing you to tailor your degree around 2 areas of study instead of just 1. After graduating with a bachelor’s degree in interdisciplinary research, you can be better prepared to pursue a wide variety of careers or continue on to graduate studies to further refine your skills.
What Is Interdisciplinary Research?
You may be wondering, “What is interdisciplinary research, how is it different from interdisciplinary studies, and why should I get a degree in it?” Most jobs require a specific selection of education, training, and experience. If an existing degree doesn’t fit, multidisciplinary studies programs attempt to meet this need by stitching together several traditional degrees into one.
An interdisciplinary research degree is, as the name suggests, a more research-focused degree, while an interdisciplinary studies degree is more practitioner-focused. We have designed the interdisciplinary research degree to focus on 2 areas of study, and your program core will consist of 17 credit hours versus the 3 credit hours in the interdisciplinary studies degree. Additionally, your studies will end in a capstone project that allows you to synthesize the 2 areas of study you have chosen. You also can showcase your work in our Center for Research and Scholarship’s Research Week. Furthermore, your interdisciplinary internship can give you a chance to turn the knowledge you have gained to wisdom which can further solidify your mastery of the subjects studied. 
This research interdisciplinary degree can help prepare you for success by combining 2 areas that may require different sets of skills and knowledge. As you meld these areas of study together to create a unique skill set, you can set yourself apart from other candidates who have more traditional degrees.
Whatever your career goals, this degree can help give you the ability to apply new skills and knowledge to many unique and cutting-edge fields. Liberty’s program integrates the specific areas of study you need into a flexible program that can help you maximize your opportunities. You can decide what your career goals are and then break down the individual areas of study you need to be successful in that field. With our interdisciplinary research degree, you can build toward your future with an outside-the-box degree plan.
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Interdisciplinary Research Online Degree?
Usually, a research-focused degree is something you find at the graduate level. Liberty University has created a program that allows you to gain research experience at the undergraduate level, challenge you to develop critical thinking skills, and equip you with the confidence needed to present your own unique findings. You can bring together 2 disciplines that may not always have been viewed as vocational partners, and in doing so, increase your marketability in the workforce.
Furthermore, Liberty is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). This means you can be confident that the training and education we provide meet the highest level of academic standards. Whether you choose to enter the workforce right away or continue on to graduate studies, having an accredited degree can help you pursue your chosen path.
What Will You Learn in Our B.S. in Interdisciplinary Research Online Degree?
When you begin our online interdisciplinary research degree, you can choose 2 areas of study that include 15 credits each to customize your degree. This can be done solely through Liberty or by utilizing transfer credit from outside colleges, military training, work experience, or on-the-job training. You can choose from areas of study such as business, government, religion, communication, digital arts, and more.
Visit our Areas of Study page to see a full list of what is available.
What Skills Can I Learn in Interdisciplinary Research?
No matter which areas of study you choose, Liberty can help you prepare for your next career move with practical professional skills, such as:
Career track preparation to help you demonstrate how your special mix of studies prepares you best for your field
Either grant writing or technical writing skills
Fine arts skills in writing, communication, and more
Liberal arts studies through Liberty’s College of Arts and Sciences that apply to many forms of business and culture
Problem-solving and critical thinking
Research methods
Technical skills for many industries
Our goal is to help you apply your unique background and education to the career path that suits you best. Your training can equip you to see the world as a set of questions and potential answers yet to be uncovered. Liberty’s goal is to train the next generation of critical thinkers to explore the frontiers of knowledge. If you’d like to challenge yourself while developing answers to questions not yet asked, then Liberty can help.
Highlights of Our Interdisciplinary Research Bachelor’s Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online interdisciplinary research degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You will have the ability to select 2 areas of study for a customized learning experience directly correlated with your research-focused career and academic goals.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/business/bachelors/information-technology/web-mobile-programming/","Design Your Career with a Bachelor’s Degree in Web and Mobile Programming
Technology and the internet impact almost every aspect of people’s lives in today’s world. To ensure that websites run smoothly and perform all of their necessary functions, web programmers are needed – individuals who handle the technical aspects of the internet, like writing code that executes applications, processes, and end-user experiences.
Computer programmers had a median salary of $89,190 in 2020*
World-class learning for anyone, anywhere
87,300 programming jobs are projected through 2030*
Are you interested in creating websites that work across a variety of platforms? If so, Liberty’s online BS in Information Technology (IT) might be the degree for you. You can complete your specialization in web and mobile programming, helping to prepare you with valuable skills needed to develop high-quality websites that work on mobile, tablet, and large screen browsers.
By earning your programming degree online from Liberty University, you can make a positive and lasting impact on the world as you lead with excellence and integrity in the field of IT.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Computer Programmers (viewed online March 17, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in Web Design and Development?
We know that quality is probably very important to you as you search for an online degree in web development. At Liberty, our web design degree is structured so that upon graduation you can confidently take the next step in the web design and development sector.
As you pursue your information technology degree online, you will be taught by professors who have terminal degrees and years of experience in the IT, web design, and development fields. In addition, Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). With recognition like this, you can be confident that you are receiving a world-class education.
We believe that quality education should be accessible. That is why our bachelor’s degree in web design and development online has multiple start dates each year and no set login times. When you get your web development bachelor’s degree online at Liberty, you can complete all of your courses from the comfort of your own home. With flexibility like this, you can continue focusing on your family, job, and other priorities.
Your time at Liberty University can help provide you with a network of alumni, faculty, and classmates who have similar goals, aspirations, and callings. With connections like these, you can be confident as you enter your career in web and mobile programming – no matter where your career leads you.
What degree should I get for web development?
Choosing your degree is an important step in your career journey. This can set the tone for the knowledge and skills you’ll receive as well as what companies may offer you a job. 
Liberty’s online web development degree can help you meet your professional goals and pursue the job you want. Here’s why:
Credibility — Liberty University is accredited by SACSCOC, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges. This means you’re earning your degree from a school that is well-respected and has met rigorous accreditation standards.
Experienced faculty — Your major courses are taught by professionals in the IT industry. These individuals have years of experience in the field, and they’re ready to share what they have learned with you.
Flexibility — Because your program can be completed 100% online, you can remain invested in your career, family, and other commitments while working on your degree."
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/interdisciplinary-studies/","Residential Interdisciplinary Studies Degree (B.A./B.S.)
Customize your degree to fit your unique career path with an Interdisciplinary Studies B.A. or B.S. from Liberty University. Design a program of study that allows you to pursue your gifts, talents, and interests while studying in an environment that is grounded in a Christian worldview and dedicated to academic excellence.
With your INDS B.A. or B.S. degree, you’ll gain a diverse set of skills across multiple areas of study that will transfer well into today’s complex job market.
What Is Interdisciplinary Studies?
Interdisciplinary studies is a program you design yourself. Here’s how our INDS bachelor’s program works. You’ll select either two or three unique areas of study that will equal 45 credit hours of classes. Within each subject area, you will handpick the classes and credit hours that will equip you to reach your career or graduate program goals.
At the end of your degree program, you’ll take the INDS capstone course, which allows you to demonstrate mastery of content you learned in each area of study. Learn how to articulate and produce a compilation of content learned in the program and discover a greater understanding of your skills and qualifications as you enter the workforce.
Select your Areas of Study
See the INDS Planning Guide
What Are the Differences Between the INDS B.A. and B.S.?
With the B.A. in Interdisciplinary Studies, you’ll receive a Liberal Arts focus which consists of language electives and an integrative elective. The B.S. in Interdisciplinary Studies does not have a liberal arts focus.
Types of Students Who Benefit From an INDS Bachelor’s Degree:
Goal-oriented students
Disciplined students
Transfer students
Students of all ages
Students with many interests
Students with a specific career path in mind
This degree is offered through the Department of Interdisciplinary Studies.
Design Your Own Degree with Interdisciplinary Studies
Academic Information for the B.A./B.S. in Interdisciplinary Studies
Common Areas of Study for Interdisciplinary Students
See Areas of Study list
Church SPED Coordinator
TESL with Global Studies
Telemedical Technician
Military Leadership
Construction Supervisor
Underwater Welder"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/interdisciplinary-studies/","Design Your Own College Program with an Online Bachelor’s in Interdisciplinary Studies Degree
You want to pursue a degree that you are passionate about, but with your background and career goals, a traditional degree might not meet your needs. At Liberty, we understand. That’s why our Bachelor of Science in Interdisciplinary Studies is customizable, allowing you to tailor your degree around several areas of study instead of just one. After graduating with a bachelor’s degree in interdisciplinary studies, you can be prepared to pursue a wide variety of careers that are unique to you and your calling.
Liberty’s Definition of Interdisciplinary Studies
You may be wondering, “What is interdisciplinary studies for, and why should I get a degree in it?” Most jobs require a specific selection of education, training, and experience. Many general studies and multidisciplinary studies programs attempt to meet this need by stitching together several traditional degrees into one if an existing degree doesn’t fit. 
A bachelor’s in general studies traditionally offers the most flexibility in how you pursue your topics of interest. We define interdisciplinary studies differently, focusing on fusing these disciplines into one unified idea. Instead of trying to adapt a collection of several separate studies to meet your needs, Liberty can help you custom-fit your education to your passion.
What are your career goals? Many unique and cutting-edge fields require skills and knowledge that don’t fit into a traditional bachelor’s degree. That’s why Liberty’s program integrates the specific areas of study you need into a flexible program that can help you maximize your opportunities. Liberty can help you think backward from your career goals to figure out what pieces need to be in place for you to get the training you need. With our 100% online interdisciplinary studies program, you can build toward your future with an outside-the-box degree plan.
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Interdisciplinary Studies Degree?
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). A quality degree program from an accredited institution means you can be confident that the training and education we provide meet the highest level of academic standards. We are proud to help you pursue your passion by offering an interdisciplinary studies degree that is available 100% online. With this flexibility and freedom, you can maintain your current schedule while working toward a better future. 
Benefits of Pursuing an Online Interdisciplinary Studies Degree at Liberty University
Utilize up to 90 hours of transfer credit from previous college courses, work training, and life experience. With the ability to use general studies in your mix of specializations, this program offers the best flexibility for the most possible transfer credit!
Meet specialized needs in innovative fields that don’t normally fit a traditional bachelor’s degree. Liberty can help you integrate different skills and prepare for a multidisciplinary role.
Not quite sure where to go with your current credit and background? Liberty’s online interdisciplinary degree will let you keep the door open to many fields while earning your bachelor’s degree.
What can you do with a bachelor’s degree in interdisciplinary studies?
The opportunities are practically endless. Your degree can be custom-built to help you complete your studies faster, fit into new roles easier, and invent a path forward in new industries. With Liberty’s accreditation through the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC), your academic credentials can help meet important education requirements for employment. 
You may also have the opportunity to pursue roles in higher education with a graduate degree and may even better fit the requirements for that degree than if you had graduated with a standard bachelor’s. Working with Liberty’s academic advisors, you can build a plan that can help you reach your goals.
Job Outlook for Interdisciplinary Students
Liberty’s online Bachelor of Science in Interdisciplinary Studies program can fit any industry with the right areas of study. With a customizable bachelor’s degree, you can take advantage of new industries and specialized market niches. But is a bachelor’s degree worth it? 
According to reporting by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), median weekly earnings in 2021 for workers with bachelor’s degrees were almost 65% higher than for workers with only a high school diploma.* A general studies degree can fill many roles, but Liberty’s flexible interdisciplinary studies program can be the best way to do so without limiting your options. Our interdisciplinary studies degree can help you take advantage of new opportunities, adapt to changes in the job market, and even build your own business based on your unique background.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Unemployment rates and earnings by educational attainment (viewed online December 2, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Liberty’s Online Interdisciplinary Studies Degree?
When you begin our online interdisciplinary studies degree, you can choose 2 areas of study that total 45 credits, or you can select 3 areas of study that are 15 credits each to customize your degree. This can be done solely through Liberty or by utilizing transfer credit from outside colleges, military training, work experience, or on-the-job training. You can choose from areas of study such as business, government, religion, technical studies, and language studies.
Visit our Areas of Study page to see a full list of all areas of study that are available.
What skills can I learn in interdisciplinary studies?
No matter which areas of study you choose, Liberty can help you prepare for your next career move with practical professional skills, such as:
Career track preparation to help you demonstrate how your special mix of studies prepares you best for your field
Fine arts skills in writing, communication, and more
Liberal arts studies through Liberty’s College of Arts and Sciences that apply to many forms of business and culture
Problem-solving and critical thinking
Technical skills for many industries
Our goal is to help you apply your unique background and education to pursue your passions. At Liberty, we strive to Train Champions for Christ, and we fulfill this mission by helping professionals like you make a positive impact on the world in ways only you can.
Program Highlights
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online interdisciplinary studies degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You will have the ability to select up to 3 areas of study for a customized learning experience directly correlated with your career and academic goals."
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/international-relations/","B.A. in International Relations
Request Info Apply Now
Residential B.A. in International Relations
Gain an understanding of the intellectual philosophies that have shaped the modern world. Our Bachelor of Arts in International Relations degree gives you a broad approach to the disciplines of economics, law, philosophy, and geography.
Prepare for your career in areas like politics, intelligence, or diplomacy as you study relationships among countries, peoples, and comparative governments. Study a foreign language and branch into a deeper understanding of either international politics and policy or strategic intelligence studies.
Learn about politics, public administration, and public policy on a global scale with the International Politics and Policy cognate. Or, study government service and intelligence with the Strategic Intelligence Studies cognate.
At the Helms School of Government, you’ll get the unique opportunity to study global issues from a Christian perspective and the ability to impact the world for Christ.
Learn How To:
Evaluate the nature and role of government from a Biblical worldview
Integrate ethical decision making in government scenarios
Communicate effectively in both written and oral formats
Demonstrate competence in the basic principles of international relations
Evaluate dilemmas in geopolitical or international relations
Recognize and apply major fundamental concepts of international relations to international relations dilemmas/practices
Academics: International Relations (B.A.)
Courses You’ll Take
Constitutional Government and Free Enterprise (GOVT 200)
International Relations (GOVT 340)
Political Geography (GOVT 440)
Political Theory (GOVT 490)
Career Opportunities in International Relations
Foreign Service Officer
Political Consultant
Political Scientist
Politician
Federal Agent (CIA, FBI, DEA, etc.)
Intelligence Analyst
Diplomat
Where Students Have Interned
Find internship opportunities on our internships page and on Handshake.
Department of Homeland Security
House Committee on Homeland Security
U.S. Department of State
House Committee on Foreign Affairs
Foreign policy advisor for the Office of Senator Marco Rubio
Israeli Embassy
Where Alumni Have Worked
Automotive Service Association (Legislative Analyst)
BAE Systems (Intelligence Analyst)
e3 Partners/I Am Second (Communications Director on the Middle East and Central Asia)
Intelligence Agencies
Israeli Embassy, Cultural Department
US Army (Battalion Intelligence Officer)
U.S. House of Representatives
“At Liberty, I learned to interpret reality from a biblical worldview, which helped shine a more trenchant light on my study of jurisprudence, civil government, and international relations.”
Branden Grosvalet – International Relations"
"https://www.liberty.edu/government/bachelors/law-policy-pre-law/","Request Info Apply to Pre-Law (B.A.) Apply to Pre-Law (B.S.)
Residential Program for Law & Policy: Pre-Law
Looking for an undergraduate degree that will prepare you for success on the LSAT, in law school, on the bar exam, and even as you practice law? Get the skills you need to prepare for the legal profession through our distinctive B.A. and B.S. degrees in Law & Policy: Pre-Law.
Learn from a curriculum designed to train you in constitutional law and history, legal ethics, logic, problem solving, and persuasion. And through our Pre-Law Concentration, you’ll get even more instruction on the core areas of the law like torts, property, contracts, and criminal and civil procedure.
In the Helms School of Government at Liberty University, you will study under law and government professors who teach from a distinctly Christian worldview. You can also get hands-on experience through our Pre-Law Studies program.
Choose between the Bachelor of Arts (incorporating a liberal arts/language focus) and the Bachelor of Science for your Law & Policy: Pre-Law degree.
Learn How To:
Perform legal research, analysis, and synthesis
Describe and understand the fundamental areas of law
Construct logical legal arguments for negotiation and problem solving
Academics: Pre-Law
Courses You’ll Take
Logic and Legal Reasoning (GOVT 215)
Criminal Law (CJUS 400)
Jurisprudence (GOVT 345)
Legal Research & Writing (GOVT 346)
American Constitutional Law (GOVT 422)
Career Opportunities
Attorney
Judge
State/Commonwealth’s Attorney
Professor
Journalist
District Attorney
Staff Judge Advocate
Public Defender
Intelligence Officer/Analyst
Civil Rights Investigator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/interior-design/","B.S. in Interior Design
Request Info Apply Now
Residential Degree in Interior Design
Get the practical, hands-on experience you need for a successful career in the interior design industry.
The Bachelor of Science in Interior Design degree at Liberty University prepares Christ-centered professionals to design innovative, functional, and environmentally responsible interior environments.
Learn through architectural and design courses, career-focused tours and field trips, and accounts from local professionals as they share their work experience. You will learn skills in 3D modeling, space planning, and lighting design, and leave Liberty University with practical knowledge in building codes, fire safety, selection of materials and finishes, and history of interior design. This education will prepare you to sit for the National Council for Interior Design Qualification (NCIDQ) exam coupled with the knowledge you’ll need to navigate the multifaceted field of interior design.
This year’s internships include HGTV, architectural firms, and interior design firms across the United States!
This degree is offered through the Department of Family & Consumer Sciences. 
Academic Information
Courses You Could Take in Interior Design
Architectural Drafting (FACS 241)
Materials and Specification (FACS 345)
Digital Drafting I & II (FACS 243 and FACS 343)
Lighting (FACS 442)
Building Construction (FACS 231)
Interior Design I, II, III, & IV (FACS 200, FACS 250,
FACS 300, FACS 460)
History of Interiors (FACS 445)
Career Opportunities in Interior Design
Space Planning
Construction/Project Management
Specialty Design: Lighting, Flooring, Historic Preservation
Home Staging
Commercial Design"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/pastoral-leadership/","Residential Music & Worship – Pastoral Leadership Program
Prepare for your future in ministry with a Music & Worship (B.S.) – Pastoral Leadership degree from Liberty University. Study worship techniques, musicianship, and worship leadership through private lessons, worship team ministry coaching, and focused classroom time. Develop your understanding of topics such as biblical studies on the philosophy of worship and foundational pastoral leadership.
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Professors in this degree program hold advanced and terminal degrees in music, as well as decades of real-world experience in worship ministry.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
The degree requires a local practicum and an extensive internship experience within worship ministry.
You will need to pass the Sophomore Review in order to be accepted into the program’s upper-level training.
Featured Pastoral Leadership Courses
Acts (BIBL 364)
Old and New Testament Music and Worship (MUSC 202)
Commercial Music Techniques for Worship (MUSC 302)
Foundation to Pastoral Leadership (PLED 201)
Family Ministry in the Church (PLED 301)
Career Opportunities: Music & Worship – Pastoral Leadership Graduates
Worship and Missions Director
Worship Leader or Pastor
Music Production Manager
Music Minister
Director of Worship Conferences"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/pre-law/","Gain a Competitive Edge with Liberty University’s Pre-Law Degree Online 
One of the most important jobs is being a lawyer. These professionals can help people navigate the legal aspect of some of life’s most difficult moments. Lawyers can help deserving parents win custody cases, bring criminals to justice, or defend the wrongfully accused. They are an integral part of upholding the integrity of society and the criminal justice system in the United States.
If you are interested in becoming one of the individuals who makes a difference for people during stressful circumstances, then an online law degree may be the program for you. Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Law and Policy – Pre-Law program can help provide you with the foundation you’ll need to pursue work as a legal aide or go on to law school.
Frequently Asked Questions
Do law schools accept online degrees?
What do lawyers major in before law?
What is the best undergraduate degree for law school?
Can you get an accredited law degree online?
What is the best online law school?
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Law and Policy – Pre-Law Degree Online?
Understanding law practice is essential to understanding public policy. Liberty’s online pre-law degree is taught through the lens of a biblical worldview to help you grow both professionally and spiritually. Our online government classes can equip you with advanced training in the core areas of law and help you think ethically about your decisions so you can prepare to make a positive impact in your community and beyond. 
When you choose Liberty University for your online pre-law degree, you can be confident that our classes are helping to prepare you to pursue your unique goals!
What Will You Learn in Our Online Pre-Law Degree?
Liberty’s online pre-law degree was designed from the input and expertise of attorneys and law professors from the Liberty University School of Law. After completing core competency courses in subjects like English, math, and information literacy, you will move into your core courses within the pre-law degree. These core courses provide training and knowledge in the areas of legal ethics, American constitutional history and law, criminal law, jurisprudence, legal research and writing, and advanced logic and legal reasoning.
Our online pre-law degree seeks to help equip you for law school by focusing on key law factors. With this unique curriculum, our online pre-law degree helps you think like a law student, introduces you to critical thinking concepts, and helps prepare you to sit for the LSAT.
Featured Courses
CJUS 410 – Constitutional Criminal Procedure
GOVT 280 – Undergraduate Torts
GOVT 345 – Jurisprudence
GOVT 406 – Undergraduate Property
Highlights of Liberty’s Pre-Law Bachelor’s Degree Online 
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years ̶ and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can pursue exciting job opportunities after completing your bachelor’s in law and policy online degree.
Gain the knowledge and training you need to prepare for the LSAT.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/worship-technology-audio/","Residential Music & Worship – Worship Technology (Audio) Program
Develop your understanding of worship technology and prepare for your future career with a Music & Worship (B.S.) – Worship Technology (Audio) degree from Liberty University. Study the foundational aspects of music, such as music theory, conducting, music production, and leadership skills. Learn about worship technology, and gain hands-on experience recording, editing, and producing music.
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Professors in this degree program hold advanced and terminal degrees in music, as well as decades of real-world experience in worship ministry.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
The degree requires local practicum and an extensive internship experience within worship ministry.
You will need to pass the Sophomore Review in order to be accepted into the program’s upper-level training.
Featured Worship Technology Courses
Fundamentals of Editing (DIGI 175)
Fundamentals of Audio Production (DIGI 224)
Post Production Sound Design (DIGI 290)
Music Recording (DIGI 337)
Advanced Audio Production (DIGI 474)
Career Opportunities: Music & Worship – Worship Technology (Audio) Graduates
Music Production Manager
Director of Worship and Drama
Director of Worship Conferences
Worship and Missions Director
Associate Director of Worship Programming
Recording Artist
Contemporary Christian Artist"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/youth-ministries/","Residential Music & Worship – Youth Ministries Program
Prepare for your future in ministry with a Music & Worship (B.S.) – Youth Ministries degree from Liberty University. Develop your skills in worship-oriented musicianship and study strategies for powerful youth ministry. Discover methods to reach young people, and gain an understanding of the culture and core values of youth in America that will help you minister effectively. Our courses will also address social issues critical to engaging youth and creating outreach programs
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Professors in this degree program hold advanced and terminal degrees in music, as well as decades of real-world experience in worship ministry.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
The degree requires a local practicum and an extensive internship experience within worship ministry.
You will need to pass the Sophomore Review in order to be accepted into the program’s upper-level training.
Featured Youth Ministries Courses
Introduction to Church Ministries (CHMN 201)
Survey of Youth Ministries (YOUT 201)
Global Youth Culture (YOUT 220)
Strategies for Student Outreach (YOUT 310)
Career Opportunities: Music & Worship – Youth Ministries Graduates
Director of Worship and Drama
Director of Youth Worship Conferences
Youth Ministry Worship Leader/Pastor
Worship and Missions Director
Associate Director of Worship Programming
Worship Arts Director
Music Minister"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/womens-leadership/","Residential Music & Worship – Women’s Leadership Program
Enhance your ministry career with a Music & Worship (B.S.) – Women’s Leadership degree from Liberty University. Develop your musical talent with courses in musicianship, leadership, and the worship arts. Gain insight into the leadership of women’s ministries, and learn the principles of spiritual formation and development for women in leadership.
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Professors in this degree program hold advanced and terminal degrees in music, as well as decades of real-world experience in worship ministry.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
The degree requires a local practicum and extensive internship experience within worship ministry.
You will need to pass the Sophomore Review in order to be accepted into the program’s upper-level training.
Featured Women’s Leadership Courses
Survey of Women’s Ministries (WLED 220)
Spiritual Formation and Development for Women in Leadership (WLED 320)
The Role of Christian Women in Ministry (WLED 330)
Methods of Teaching the Bible and Communication Skills for Women (WLED 387)
Leadership & Management in Ministry (CHMN 450)
Career Opportunities: Music & Worship – Women’s Leadership Graduates
Worship Leader
Music Minister
Music and Worship Evangelist
Worship and Missions Director
Director of Worship Arts
Contemporary Christian Artist
Associate Director of Worship Programming
Director of Worship and Drama
Director of Worship Conferences
Director of Worship Technology"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/music-education-instrumental-music/","Residential Degree in Music Education – Instrumental Program
Looking to launch a successful career in music education? The Bachelor of Music in Music Education with an Instrumental Cognate strategically prepares you to:
Become a competent professional in the field of music education
Be licensed to teach music in Christian, public, or private schools by gaining licensure as a qualified music teacher by a state department of education
Participate in numerous ensembles, gaining practical performance experience directly applicable to your future classroom
Featured Courses
Principles of Arranging (MUSC 310)
Basic Conducting (MUSC 315)
Instrumental Conducting (MUSC 317)
Commercial Improvisation Techniques (MUSC 360)
Instrumental Techniques Electives (Select 3 – MUSC 355, MUSC 357, MUSC 363, MUSC 374)
Career Opportunities: Music Education – Instrumental Graduates
Christian music artist
Music program director
Music teacher
Private music instructor
Professional musician"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/music-instrumental/","Residential Music Instrumental Program
The Bachelor of Science in Music Instrumental provides you with the opportunity to complete studies in music while earning a liberal arts degree. You can choose to place special emphasis on guitar, strings, piano, woodwind, brass, or percussion.
Academics: Music Instrumental (B.S.)
Featured Music Instrumental Courses
Harmonic Practices and Theory I (MUSC 105)
Music History (Antiquity-1750) (MUSC 311)
Basic Conducting (MUSC 315)
Music Technology I: Notation (MUSC 330)
Commercial Improvisation Techniques (MUSC 360)
Career Opportunities: Music Instrumental Graduates
Arts administrator
Music director and composer
Music therapist (requires graduate study)
Professional musician
Private music teacher"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/music-education-choral-music/","Residential Degree in Music Education – Choral Program
The Bachelor of Music in Music Education with a Choral Cognate strategically prepares you in many disciplines within choral music. Study arranging, choral conducting, and vocal pedagogy for music education. Prepare to teach music in Christian, public, or private schools. Gain licensure as a qualified music teacher by a state department of education.
Academics: Music Education (B.M.) – Choral Cognate
Featured Courses
Musicianship I (MUSC 107)
Principles of Arranging (MUSC 310)
Choral Conducting (MUSC 316)
Commercial Improvisation Techniques (MUSC 360)
Vocal Diction (MUSC 393)
Career Opportunities: Music Education – Choral Graduates
Band director
Choir director
Private voice teacher
Music ministry
Primary or secondary music education teacher"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/music-vocal/","Residential Music Vocal Program
The Bachelor of Science in Music Vocal provides you with the opportunity to complete studies in music while earning a liberal arts degree. You are not required to complete any foreign language credits. With this degree, you have the opportunity to include 15-29 hours in an elective discipline, including instrumental or choral techniques courses.
Academics: Music Vocal (B.S.)
Featured Music Vocal Courses
Harmonic Practices and Theory I (MUSC 105)
Voice (Freshman) (MUSC 121)
Basic Conducting (MUSC 315)
Music Technology I: Notation (MUSC 330)
Vocal Diction (MUSC 393)
Career Opportunities: Music Vocal Graduates
Choral conductor
Opera singer
Recording artist
Professional recitalist
Professional voice teacher"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/music-in-world-cultures/","Residential Music in World Cultures Program
As cultures interact more frequently, the study of music in its cultural context has become important in education, business, cultural programming, and cross-cultural outreach. The Bachelor of Music in Music in World Cultures specializes in the intersection of music and worship in multicultural and cross-cultural contexts.
Are you ready to impact world cultures for Christ through music?
With Liberty’s B.M. in World Cultures, you’ll:
Be equipped with the skills and theoretical framework you need to work in a variety of cultural contexts
Prepare to be challenged in your musicianship as you work to engage other communities
Audition for one of our ethnic music ensembles and learn new instruments, adapt to a different musical style, and apply new song styles
Gain hands-on experience by completing an internship through the School of Music
Featured Music in World Cultures Courses
Creative Worship (MUSC 201)
Intercultural Communication & Engagement (GLST 220)
Ethnic Music Ensemble (MUSC 349)
Career Preparation for Global Workers (GLST 385)
Arts in Global Outreach (MUSC 424)
Ethnic Music Seminar (MUSC 440)
Career Opportunities: Music in World Cultures Graduates
Cross-cultural worship leader
Ethnomusicologist
Missionary
World arts cultural exchange facilitator
Worship consultant"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/bs-music-in-world-cultures/","Residential Degree: Music in World Cultures (B.S.)
Develop musical and cultural skills as you prepare for your career with a B.S. in Music in World Cultures from Liberty University. Learn how to lead worship and share the gospel in a variety of cultural settings.
With this degree, you’ll become equipped to serve in ministries around the world using your musical talents. And, as an added component, choose electives that can help to broaden your career opportunities.
Here, you’ll learn from professors with a wide variety of expertise in ethnomusicology, missiology, linguistics, global studies, and more. Faculty members are experienced in their fields and grounded in their Christian faith. Prepare to make an impact around the world, as you gain a solid foundation in technical skills, research, and fieldwork in music and ethnomusicology.
The Liberty University School of Music offers state-of-the-art facilities including a 1,600-seat concert hall, two recital halls, five music theory classrooms, and songwriting, mac, and piano labs. Also, benefit from our on-site recording studio, equipped with beautiful acoustics, advanced music production technology, and unique architecture that leads to a soundproof environment.
Academic Information: B.S. in Music and World Cultures
Featured Music in World Culture Courses
Music in World Cultures (MUSC 314)
Ethnic Music Theory (MUSC 402)
Ethnic Music Seminar (MUSC 440)
Ethnic Music Program (MUSC 392)
Ethnic Ensemble (MUSC 349)
Career Opportunities: Music in World Cultures Graduates
Cross-cultural worship leader, trainer, or facilitator
Festival organizer for local arts
Missionary (specializing in arts contextualization)
Music researcher or journalist
Music teacher in other countries
World arts and cultural exchange facilitator
Preservation and oral history specialist
Vernacular media specialist
Performer or recording artist"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts/bachelors/musical-theatre-bfa/","BFA in Musical Theatre
Request Info Apply Now
Residential Musical Theatre Program
Prepare for a career in theatre through the multifaceted Bachelor of Fine Arts in Musical Theatre program at Liberty University. Develop your craft by concentrating on music, dance, and acting.
Beyond the classroom, you’ll hone your expertise by taking advantage of the many on-campus opportunities available. Six academic shows are produced each year between the Tower Theater and The Box Theater. You will also have the opportunity to audition for the professional arm of the department, the Alluvion Stage Company, which produces one to two shows each season.
Liberty University is also an active participant in:
Kennedy Center American College Theatre Festival (KCACTF)
Virginia Theatre Association (VTA)
Southeastern Theatre Conference (SETC)
For complete information on the BFA in Musical Theatre, including academic requirements, policies, and procedures, see the BFA Handbook.
Academics: BFA in Musical Theatre
Credit Hours
120 total credit hours
Degree Completion Plan (DCP)
Musical Theatre (BFA) DCP
Admission Requirements
Students will need to complete a BFA audition and be accepted by the Performance Faculty into the BFA Musical Theatre program. Students are given two opportunities to pass the audition to be accepted into the program. (Visit the BFA Entrance Auditions page for audition dates and requirements.)
View Liberty’s undergraduate admissions requirements
Musical Theatre Courses
Careers in Professional Theatre (THEA 481)
Christian Aesthetics in Theatre (THEA 381)
Various Dance Technique Classes (THEA 108, THEA 109, THEA 208, and THEA 209)
Musical Theatre I and II (THEA 251 and THEA 351)
Harmonic Practices and Theory (MUSC 105)
Stage Combat (THEA 321)
Get Started with Your Degree"
"https://www.liberty.edu/nursing/bachelors/bsn/accelerated/","Residential Degree in Nursing: Accelerated Pre-Licensure (BSN)
Earn your Bachelor of Science in Nursing: Accelerated Pre-Licensure (BSN) from Liberty University, and start your next chapter with a rewarding career in the nursing field. The accelerated BSN programs provide a pathway to the BSN for those students who already have a Bachelor’s degree in another field. In the accelerated program, students will be able to complete the program in 19 months. 
As a student in the School of Nursing, you will be taught by experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith. Our faculty are committed to helping you succeed both as a student and as an individual.
Through our program, you’ll learn how to apply personal and professional Christian values as you provide nursing care for individuals, families, and groups in your community.
To qualify for the Accelerated BSN programs, you must be seeking a second bachelor’s degree.
Academics: Nursing: Accelerated Pre-Licensure (B.S.)
Credit Hours
124 total hours
Degree Completion Plan
Bachelor of Science in Nursing: Accelerated Pre-Licensure 
Frequently Asked Questions
Accelerated BSN FAQ
Admission requirements
Minimum cumulative 3.25 GPA (all college course work including dual enrollment in high school) Note: In addition to the cumulative GPA requirement when transferring in credits from outside Liberty, the Liberty University portion of the cumulative GPA must also be at least 3.25.
55 transferable credits to the Nursing Degree Completion Plan
Must have prerequisites completed by the end of the semester prior to starting the program. 
Prerequisites
BIOL 213/214 & 215/216 – Anatomy & Physiology I & II
CHEM 107 – General/Organic Chemistry
NURS 115 – Pre-licensure Pathophysiology
BIOL 203 – Microbiology
NURS 104 – Introduction to Nursing/Medical Terminology
If you do not meet all the above requirements, you may be eligible to apply to the BS in Nursing: Pre-Licensure program.
Start Your Nursing Career
Application Deadlines
Fall Semester: December 1-February 15
View Liberty’s undergraduate admissions requirements
*You must apply and be accepted to Liberty first before accessing the BSN Program application.
CCNE Accreditation
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the post-graduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education, 655 K Street, NW, Suite 750, Washington, DC 20001, (202) 887-6791.
Simulation Center Accreditation
The Liberty University School of Nursing Simulation Center is fully accredited by the Society for Simulation in Healthcare in the areas of Teaching/Education. Accreditation is for the period of June 20, 2018 – December 31, 2023.
Society for Simulation in Healthcare (SSH)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/nursing/bachelors/bsn/global-studies/","Prepare for a Global Nursing Career with the Residential B.S. in Nursing: Global Studies (Pre-Licensure)
Open the door for global opportunities in your nursing career with your Nursing: Pre-Licensure (B.S.N.) – Global Studies cognate degree. Here, you’ll discover how to provide nursing care to diverse populations.
Nurses care for diverse communities in the U.S. and serve on medical missions trips or as part of overseas medical teams. In this cognate, you will:
Grow in your knowledge of diverse cultures
Gain an understanding of cultural intelligence
Improve your skills in communicating with various people groups.
Have the opportunity to attend medical missions trips with LUSON.
Study under faculty who are grounded in their Christian faith and who have experience serving as nurses in various cultures. With this cognate, you’ll learn how to communicate with patients and families in a culturally sensitive way that improves their medical care experience. Whether you’re interacting in a community or an acute care setting, your cultural awareness will positively impact your nursing skills.
Discover More About our B.S.N.
BS in Nursing: Pre-Licensure (BSN)
Featured Global Studies Courses
Introduction to Global Studies (GLST 200)
Intercultural Communication and Engagement (GLST 220)
Cultural Anthropology (GLST 290)
Start Your Nursing Career
Application Deadlines
Spring Semester and Spring Accelerated: August 1-October 1
Fall Semester and Summer Accelerated: December 1-February 28
*You must apply and be accepted to Liberty first before accessing the BSN Program application.
Career Opportunities for Nurses with a BSN: Global Studies
Medical Missions
Missionary Nursing
Nursing Abroad
Flight Nurse
Obstetrics
Pediatrics
Physician’s Office
Public Health
Surgical
Rehabilitation
Emergency Department
Clinic Nurse
Critical Care
Oncology
Orthopedics
CCNE Accreditation
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the post-graduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education, 655 K Street, NW, Suite 750, Washington, DC 20001, (202) 887-6791."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/nursing/bachelors/rn-bsn-msn/","Fast Track Your Career Through Our Online RN to MSN Programs
If you are a registered nurse who’s looking to take your nursing career to the next level, you should consider pursuing our 100% online RN to BSN to MSN degree program. With our accelerated MSN programs, you can earn both your bachelor’s and master’s degrees from an accredited university that focuses on quality education.
We know that you have a great deal of training and knowledge working as an RN, so we have given you the opportunity to transfer in up to 75 hours of previous college credit. You can also apply for credit through our Experience Plus program.
This transferability can make our degree one of the shortest RN to MSN online programs available. Pursue the credentials you need for your career and apply today!
Our accelerated BSN to MSN programs have multiple areas of specialization that you can choose from to further your education in your area of study. The Nursing Administrator specialization prepares you for employment or advancement in nursing leadership and management positions. As a Nursing Educator, you will be ready to promote nursing through teaching, clinical practice, and program development. By pursuing our Nursing Informatics area of study, you can prepare for a career in managing healthcare resources to achieve superior healthcare management. Check out our specializations tab to find out what other areas of study we offer and how each one can help you succeed!
On your path from RN to earning a bachelor’s in nursing and masters in nursing, you will be taught by nursing professionals with real-world experience in clinical and leadership settings. By obtaining both your BSN and your MSN, you will open up further doors to career advancement.
What is an accelerated MSN?
Accelerated MSN programs combine the studies of an RN to BSN and a BSN to MSN program to help you reach your goals sooner. Accelerated RN to MSN programs provide the best value for students who want to reach the masters level in nursing because of the shortened time frame and lower costs overall. Liberty University’s RN to MSN is designed for the fastest, most convenient, and least expensive path forward if you want to pursue an advanced career in nursing.
Licensure requirements may vary and are subject to change without notice. View your state’s requirements here: licensure/certification requirements.
Why Choose Liberty’s RN to MSN Online Program?
As you research online RN to MSN programs, we know that you want to get the most out of your current training and RN license. With an RN license, you will receive a minimum total of 39 hours of transfer credit to help you complete our accelerated RN to MSN track. This nursing degree program is offered 100% online, which means you can obtain your bachelor’s and master’s degree in nursing on your schedule, from wherever you are.
You can focus on your current career as an RN while earning your BSN to MSN degree online. You can also have the advantage of a full masters-level credential, unlike many fast-track RN to BSN online programs. With our accommodating program format, you do not have to put your current life on hold to prepare for future career growth.
You also do not have to sacrifice quality for the convenience of studying 100% online. Liberty University’s RN to BSN to MSN degree program was awarded by Grad School Hub as one of the best online master’s in nursing for 2020.
Top Benefits of the Online RN to BSN to MSN Degree
39 Credits for RN License – With an RN license, you will receive 39 hours of course credits toward your nursing degree.
Reduced Tuition Rate – For any of Liberty’s RN to BSN to MSN tracks, you’ll pay only $330 per credit hour for part or full-time!
2-Year BSN and MSN Accelerated Track – Liberty’s School of Nursing offers the online RN to BSN to MSN program in an accelerated format that allows you to earn both your BSN and MSN faster than ever. Call us today to find out how you can earn both your BSN and MSN online in 24 months.
Common Questions
Can you get your MSN without a BSN?
Why should I get my master’s in nursing?
How long does it take to go from RN to MSN?
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the post-graduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.ccneaccreditation.org).
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Unemployment rates and earnings by educational attainment, 2020 (viewed online July 19, 2021). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/nursing/bachelors/rn-bsn-msn/community-health/","Help Your Community Overcome Health Challenges with Liberty’s Online RN-BSN-MSN in Community Health
As a licensed nurse, you work closely with patients to meet their immediate health needs. Throughout this process, these patients also need guidance on how to live healthier lives and avoid health challenges outside of the hospital setting. Liberty University’s online RN to BSN to MSN in Community Health is designed to provide you with the tools you need to develop relationships within the community so you can identify and address their health needs.
By pursuing our RN-BSN-MSN in Community Health, you will gain the skills and confidence to help your community make positive, healthy life decisions. This program is designed to help you complete a Bachelor of Science in Nursing credential on your way to earning your Master of Science in Nursing – all within a shorter total time frame. With these advanced degrees, you can prepare yourself for new heights in your nursing career. Your training in community health can also prepare you for opportunities in leadership and outreach. Let Liberty University partner with you to help meet your career goals with the online RN-BSN-MSN in Community Health, and you can look forward to a bright future.
Licensure requirements may vary and are subject to change without notice. View your state’s requirements here: licensure/certification requirements.
Why Choose Liberty’s MSN Community Health Nursing Degree?
As an innovator in distance education since 1985, we know what it takes to create a balance of flexibility and quality that can help you get the skills you need to achieve your dreams, all while fitting into your life. With our flexible, 8-week course formats, you will be able to keep up with the demands of your nursing profession while simultaneously enhancing your knowledge of nursing and learning to incorporate healthcare policy. Additionally, you can confidently pursue your degree here since all of Liberty’s nursing programs hold accreditation through the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE).
While earning your RN-BSN-MSN degree, you can be confident that you will be learning about community health and advanced nursing practice from a faculty of healthcare experts with years of experience in the field. As a graduate from Liberty, you will be equipped with practical skills and advanced studies so you can work with leaders to create positive changes in the businesses, schools, and public spaces in your area. If you want to increase your career opportunities and help make change happen in your community, Liberty’s online RN-BSN-MSN program can help you prepare for a fulfilling career.
Benefits of Pursuing an Online RN to BSN to MSN Degree
39 credits for RN license – With an RN license, you will receive 39 hours of course credits toward your nursing degree.
Reduced tuition rate – For any of Liberty’s RN to BSN to MSN tracks, you’ll pay only $330 per credit hour for part- or full-time attendance!
2-Year BSN and MSN Accelerated Track – Liberty’s School of Nursing offers the online RN-BSN-MSN program in an accelerated format that will allow you to earn both your BSN and MSN faster than ever. Call us today to find out how in 24 months you will be able to earn both your BSN and MSN online.
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the postgraduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.ccneaccreditation.org).
What Will You Learn in Our MSN Community Health Nursing Program?
Our RN to BSN to MSN takes you through the content of the Bachelor of Science in Nursing, which expands on your nursing training to improve your nursing practice techniques. Your undergraduate nursing courses will cover new topics in treatments, assessments, and problem-solving that can help equip you for more advanced roles in the nursing field.
Liberty University’s online graduate nursing courses will then further develop your administrative, leadership, and advanced practice skills to help equip you for management and leadership in the nursing setting. The community health focus of this program will provide you with the information you need to succeed in fulfilling the role of a nurse by serving the needs of the public.
Through our graduate nursing content, you can learn to provide care to individuals within the community, educate patients through community-based intervention programs, and identify and correct multiple health issues. You will also cover advanced health topics in biostatistics, environmental health, epidemiology, and social and behavioral sciences. Liberty University’s RN-BSN-MSN in Community Health will also include practicum courses that will expand your engagement within the community and teach you to be a successful public health nurse.
Featured Courses
HLTH 503 – Principles of Epidemiology
HLTH 505 – Principles of Environmental Health 
NURS 501 – Health Policy and Ethics*
NURS 503 – Managing Population Health*
*Course guide available upon request
RN to BSN to MSN Online Program Highlights
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online RN to BSN to MSN degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. Liberty’s RN to BSN to MSN track has a reduced tuition rate of $330 per credit hour for part- or full-time attendance. This includes the tuition for graduate courses!
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you.
With an RN license, you will receive a minimum of 39 hours of transfer credit with no challenge tests so that you can finish your degree faster.
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the postgraduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.ccneaccreditation.org).
The content of the RN-BSN-MSN in Community Health can prepare you to seek certification in public health nursing upon graduation.
Earn hands-on experience with 3 in-person practicums. 
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/nursing/bachelors/bsn/","Residential Degree in Nursing: Pre-Licensure (BSN)
Earn your Bachelor of Science in Nursing: Pre-Licensure (BSN) from Liberty University, and get ready for a rewarding career in the nursing field. At Liberty, you can earn your BSN in just four years and be ready to start your career as a nurse right after graduation. As a student in the School of Nursing, you will be taught by experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith. Our faculty are committed to helping you succeed both as a student and as an individual. Through our program, you’ll learn how to apply personal and professional Christian values as you provide nursing care for individuals, families, and groups in your community.
Learn About Our Global Studies Cognate
Pre-Licensure: Global Studies – Residential 
Student Testimonial — Hear My Story
Learn about our Accelerated Pre-Licensure (BSN) program launching Summer 2023
Accelerated Pre-Licensure (BSN) – Residential
2023 Best RN Programs in Virginia
Liberty’s BSN program is ranked #5 in Virginia. Learn more about these rankings at RegisteredNursing.org. 
Academics: Nursing: Pre-Licensure (B.S.)
99% of students enter into the workforce upon graduation
You will receive more than 600 hours of clinical training, more than nursing students at other institutions
98% of students pass the NCLEX exam on the first attempt
Provide both distant and international clinical experiences
Start Your Nursing Career
Application Deadlines
Spring Semester and Spring Fast Track: August 1-October 1
Fall Semester and Summer Fast Track: December 1-February 15
*You must apply and be accepted to Liberty first before accessing the BSN Program application.
Scholarships
CampusRN Virginia Nursing Scholarships (Various awards and amounts)
F.A. Davis Nursing Scholarships (Award amount: $1,500)
Career Opportunities as a Nurse
Critical Care
Emergency Department
Obstetrics
Home Health
Flight Nurse
Pediatrics
Physician’s Office
Public Health
Surgical
Rehabilitation
Missionary Nursing
Clinic Nurse
Army/Air Force/Navy
Oncology
Orthopedics
LUSON Peer Tutoring
Scheduling an Appointment
Instructional Resources
How to Schedule or Cancel a School of Nursing Tutoring Appointment in Compass
Guidelines
You must be enrolled in the course for which you are requesting tutoring.
You should bring your study materials (textbook, class notes, etc.) to your appointment, so that your tutor can best help you.
You are not permitted to ask tutors to complete your homework, quizzes, or tests.
CCNE Accreditation
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the post-graduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education, 655 K Street, NW, Suite 750, Washington, DC 20001, (202) 887-6791.
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the post-graduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education, 655 K Street, NW, Suite 750, Washington, DC 20001, (202) 887-6791.
Simulation Center Accreditation
The Liberty University School of Nursing Simulation Center is fully accredited by the Society for Simulation in Healthcare in the areas of Teaching/Education. Accreditation is for the period of June 20, 2018 – December 31, 2023.
Society for Simulation in Healthcare (SSH)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/nursing/bachelors/rn-bsn-msn/health-policy/","Become a Leader in the Healthcare Industry with Liberty’s Online RN-BSN-MSN in Health Policy
As a nurse, you have hands-on experience with what works well in the healthcare industry – and what needs improvement. By building on your nursing background with advanced nursing studies and policy knowledge, you can be a positive influence in healthcare policy at the local or national level. Liberty University’s RN to BSN to MSN in Health Policy can help you use your nursing license in a way that will help improve the lives of patients and healthcare professionals.
Through our RN-BSN-MSN program, you will gain the knowledge needed to work with leaders and government officials to improve healthcare in your community and nationwide. This program is designed to help you complete a Bachelor of Science in Nursing credential on your way to earning your Master of Science in Nursing – all within a shorter total time frame. With these advanced degrees, you can prepare yourself for new heights in your nursing career. With policy expertise, you will also be prepared for new opportunities in leadership in the healthcare industry. Let Liberty University partner with you to help meet your career goals with the online RN-BSN-MSN in Health Policy, and you can look forward to a bright future.
Licensure requirements may vary and are subject to change without notice. View your state’s requirements here: licensure/certification requirements.
Why Choose Liberty’s RN-MSN in Health Policy Program?
As an innovator in distance education since 1985, we know what it takes to create a balance of flexibility and quality that can help you get the skills you need to achieve your dreams, all while fitting into your life. With our flexible, 8-week course formats, you will be able to keep up with the demands of your nursing profession while simultaneously enhancing your knowledge of nursing and learning to incorporate healthcare policy. Additionally, you can confidently pursue your degree here since all of Liberty’s nursing programs hold accreditation through the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE).
While earning your RN-BSN-MSN degree, you can be confident that you will be learning about healthcare policy from a faculty of healthcare experts with years of experience in the field. As a graduate from Liberty, you will be equipped with practical skills and advanced studies so you can work with leaders to create positive change in healthcare policy. If you want to increase your career opportunities and help make change happen in your industry, Liberty’s online RN-BSN-MSN program can help you get there.
Benefits of Pursuing an Online RN to BSN to MSN Degree
39 credits for RN license – With an RN license, you will receive 39 hours of course credits toward your nursing degree.
Reduced tuition rate – For any of Liberty’s RN to BSN to MSN tracks, you’ll pay only $330 per credit hour for part- or full-time!
2-Year BSN and MSN Accelerated Track – Liberty’s School of Nursing offers the online RN-BSN-MSN program in an accelerated format that will allow you to earn both your BSN and MSN faster than ever. Call us today to find out how in 24 months you will be able to earn both your BSN and MSN online.
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the postgraduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.ccneaccreditation.org).
What Will You Learn in Our Nursing and Healthcare Policy Program?
Our RN to BSN to MSN takes you through the content of the Bachelor of Science in Nursing, which expands on your nursing training to improve your nursing practice techniques. Your undergraduate nursing courses will cover new topics in treatments, assessments, and problem-solving that can equip you for more advanced roles in the nursing field.
Liberty University’s online graduate nursing courses will then further develop your administrative, leadership, and advanced practice skills to equip you for management and leadership roles in the nursing setting. In the health policy area of study, you will also expand your knowledge of the nursing field to identify how health policy impacts health outcomes. You will study how to analyze healthcare laws, regulations, and public policies, devise strategies to advocate policy change, and implement new policy principles in health.
Our RN-BSN-MSN in Health Policy will give you useful cross-training in nursing, government, and business that can allow you to use your skills in nursing to help tackle challenges in your community and communities around the globe. As a critical hands-on application of your new skills, you will complete practicum courses that will expose you to executive management, leadership, and policy-making processes and activities.
Featured Courses
NURS 501 – Health Policy and Ethics*
NURS 503 – Managing Population Health*
PADM 550 – Public Policy Analysis
PPOG 530 – Domestic Policy
*Course guide available upon request
RN to BSN to MSN Online Program Highlights
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online RN to BSN to MSN degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. Liberty’s RN to BSN to MSN track has a reduced tuition rate of $330 per credit hour for part- or full-time attendance. This includes the tuition for graduate courses!
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you.
With an RN license, you will receive a minimum of 39 hours of transfer credit with no challenge tests so that you can finish your degree faster.
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the postgraduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.ccneaccreditation.org).
The content of the RN-BSN-MSN in Health Policy can prepare you to seek certification in public health nursing upon graduation.
Earn real-world experience with in-person practicums. 
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/nursing/bachelors/rn-bsn-msn/rn-to-bsn-to-msn-administration/","Our RN to BSN to MSN – Nurse Administrator Degree Is an Accelerated Nursing Program Online Designed to Save You Time and Money! 
We know that you are passionate about helping people. At Liberty, we want to partner with you to help you take your existing experience as a nurse and continue to sharpen your skills so that you can impact the nursing field – whether you want to explore new opportunities or pursue positions of added responsibility. By pursuing a BSN to MSN credential at Liberty, you can add worthwhile credentials to your RN and be better prepared to take the next step in your nursing career.
Nursing is one of the most in-demand careers in the country. If you are a registered nurse and want to grow in your career and complete an accelerated nursing program online, then our RN to BSN to MSN online degree program with a specialization in nurse administration may be right for you! Our nursing administrator specialization can help prepare you for employment and advancement in nursing leadership and management positions.
Why Choose Liberty University’s RN to BSN to MSN Online – Nurse Administrator Degree Program? 
With an RN license, you can receive a minimum total of 39 transfer credits to help you complete our accelerated RN to MSN track. This nursing degree program is offered 100% online, which means you can obtain your bachelor’s and master’s degrees in nursing wherever you are, whenever you need.
At Liberty, you can focus on your current career as an RN while working towards obtaining your BSN and MSN degrees. An RN to MSN nursing administration online degree typically requires a BSN. However, with our program, you can earn a BSN and an MSN at the same time! Many BSN to MSN programs are not accelerated, but at Liberty, our RN to BSN to MSN program is accelerated — so you can earn your degree quickly while continuing to work in your current role!
With our flexible 8-week program format, you do not have to put your life on hold to prepare for future career growth. And you don’t have to sacrifice quality for convenience! Our RN to BSN to MSN online – nursing administration degree program is widely recognized for its flexibility, affordability, and quality.
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the postgraduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.ccneaccreditation.org).
Benefits of Pursuing an Online RN to BSN to MSN Degree
39 credits for RN license – With an RN license, you can receive 39 hours of course credit toward your nursing degree.
Reduced tuition rate – For any of Liberty’s RN to BSN to MSN tracks, you’ll pay only $330 per credit hour for part- or full-time enrollment!
2-Year BSN and MSN Accelerated Track – Liberty’s School of Nursing offers the online RN-BSN-MSN program in an accelerated format that will allow you to earn both your BSN and MSN faster than ever. Call us today to find out how in 24 months you will be able to earn both your BSN and MSN online.
Frequently Asked Questions
How do I become a nurse administrator?
How much does a nurse manager make?
Is an RN to BSN to MSN nursing program worth it? 
What Will You Learn in Our RN to BSN to MSN Online – Nurse Administrator Degree Program?
Our RN to BSN to MSN – Nurse Administrator online program is packed with the essential coursework you need to become an expert in your field. Our accelerated nursing programs include undergraduate general education and nursing courses as well as graduate-level nursing and business courses weaved into the program for your nurse administrator specialization.
Review our course guides below to see how you will engage with essential topics including nursing administration and hospital administration.
Featured Courses
BUSI 610 – Organizational Design and Structure
BUSI 642 – Contemporary Issues in HR Management
NURS 501 – Health Policy and Ethics*
NURS 521 – Nursing Issues, Informatics, and Technology*
*Course guides available upon request
RN to BSN to MSN Online Program Highlights 
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online RN to BSN to MSN degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. Liberty’s RN to BSN to MSN track has a reduced tuition rate of $330 per credit hour for part- or full-time students. This includes the tuition for graduate courses!
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
With an RN license, you can receive a minimum of 39 hours of transfer credit with no challenge tests so that you can finish your degree faster!
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the postgraduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.ccneaccreditation.org).
You will have networking opportunities with other RNs in the program from across the country.
Gain hands-on experiences with your in-person practicum. 
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/nursing/bachelors/rn-to-bsn/","Liberty University’s RN to BSN Online Degree is a Leader in Online Nursing Programs
Like you, Liberty University is dedicated to pursuing excellence in everything we do. That’s why our RN to BSN degree is one of the leading online nursing programs providing licensed, practicing registered nurses the opportunity to finish their education 100% online. Our online RN to BSN degree’s curriculum builds on your knowledge and experience to help you grow in critical thinking, leadership, and clinical skills.
Whether you are seeking to advance in your current role or explore other areas like community health nursing, our online nursing program is designed to equip you with the knowledge and training you need to excel. 
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the postgraduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.ccneaccreditation.org).
Industry Needs
An estimated 3.3 million RN positions will be available in the United States by 2030, which is a 9% increase from 2020, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).*
Studies and data provided by the American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) show nurses who hold a bachelor’s degree are connected with lower patient mortality rates, fewer medication errors, and more positive outcomes.**
The AACN has officially recognized a BSN as the minimum education requirement for professional nursing practice.^
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) has revealed that 56% of RNs hold a bachelor’s degree or higher in combination with their nursing licenses.^^
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Registered Nurses (viewed online Jan. 6, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
Benefits
With a BSN, you may see an average salary increase of $15,000 per year over your RN counterparts who do not have a bachelor’s degree.*
At Liberty, you can take advantage of affordable tuition. All bachelor’s programs have had tuition frozen for the past 8 years — and counting.
A BSN could give you additional career opportunities in fields like education, case management, informatics, or clinical supervision.
You may be interested in pursuing your Master of Science in Nursing (MSN) or Doctor of Nurse Practitioner (DNP). A BSN is the first step to higher education in your nursing academics.
*Nurse Journal: Social Community for Nurses Worldwide, at BSN Degree vs. RN differences (viewed on Jan. 6, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
How long does it take to get a BSN degree?
Though the time it takes you to complete an online BSN nursing degree depends on how many courses you are able to successfully take per semester, Liberty’s RN to BSN online program can be completed in as little as 2.5 years. Our online RN program is one that blends flexibility, affordability, and convenience – allowing you to pursue your studies at a pace that best fits your life. 
How much is an RN to BSN online?
An important question you may be asking as you’re considering an RN to BSN program online is how much will it cost? While some online nursing programs may cost more than others, we believe the benefits available at Liberty can be worth your investment. Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Nursing has a reduced tuition rate of $330 per credit hour.
Affordability
Liberty University has frozen tuition for all undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting!
With your online RN to BSN, you’ll receive a reduced tuition rate of $330 per credit hour for part- or full-time attendance!
If you are a service member, veteran, or military spouse, you may be eligible for the military tuition discount, which is $250 per credit hour for undergraduate students.
If you are a veteran serving as a First Responder, you may be eligible for an additional discount (less than $565 per course).
Flexibility
With your RN license, you’ll transfer a minimum of 39 credits to give you a jump start on your program. This translates into a smaller financial investment to the overall cost of your degree.
Because of transfer potential and our 100% online format, you can complete your online RN to BSN degree in as little as 2.5 years!
RN to BSN courses are offered in a flexible 8-week format, with 8 different start dates throughout the year, and no set login times to allow for maximum accessibility while you continue working and receiving clinical experiences while pursuing your degree.
Licensure requirements may vary and are subject to change without notice. View your state’s requirements here: licensure/certification requirements.
Why Choose a Liberty RN to BSN Degree?
With an RN license, you will receive a minimum of 39 hours of transfer credit to help you complete our industry-leading RN to BSN degree. Our online nursing programs are taught by nursing professionals with real-world clinical experiences in leadership settings. Our RN to BSN degree is offered completely online, allowing you to remain active with your job, family, and community without the worry of having to take courses on campus.
Is an online nursing degree credible at Liberty?
As you’re considering pursuing an online nursing program, you’re probably wondering if it is worth your time and effort. What is it, you ask, that will make your degree credible and valuable?
Liberty University is regionally accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). Earning your degree from us means that you’re receiving your education from a school that is well-respected and recognized among employers and other higher education institutions.
Additionally, Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Nursing is accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE). You can rest assured knowing that your degree has met the rigorous accreditation standards needed to provide you with a top-of-the-line RN to BSN curriculum.
In addition to our regional and programmatic accreditation, you’ll be learning from expert nursing professionals. Each of our faculty members has on-the-job experience in their respective fields. That means by partnering with us, you’ll learn from men and women who have worked hands-on in the medical field as professional nurses. They can bring their experiential knowledge to the virtual classroom throughout your studies.
Furthermore, this degree program offers you something that not all nursing programs do: a 100% online structure. As an RN, you’ll have real-world experience heading into our nursing bachelor degree online – meaning that you won’t have to worry about completing practicums. One course in this RN to BSN online requires community-based clinical observation hours, but you will be able to remain committed to your job, family, and community as you pursue your BSN degree at Liberty.
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the postgraduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.ccneaccreditation.org).
What Will You Learn in the RN to BSN Degree Online Program?
Our students’ career goals vary, and that is why our online nursing programs are such a great fit. Our faculty members have practiced in cardiac care, critical care, emergency medicine, med-surg, oncology, research, as nurse practitioners, and in just about every specialty the field of nursing touches in a clinical and administrative setting. Their vast years of experience and our rigorous curriculum can help you use your own experiences to grow in practice and leadership. 
By transferring your RN license into Liberty’s BSN, the majority of your industry-standard nursing courses can be satisfied. Your remaining nursing courses focus on field leadership, research, and health strategies essential to your success as a nurse. These courses can also be helpful for you if you later decide to pursue nurse management positions or an advanced nursing degree down the road. 
This RN to BSN online degree is designed to build on the experience you have gained as an RN. In our degree, you will study microbiology, chemistry for health sciences professionals, statistics, biomedical ethics, general psychology, and developmental psychology. In addition, this RN to BSN degree covers advanced nursing communication and strategies for community health care. 
Your RN license has equipped you with a knowledge of medical terminology, the fundamentals of nursing, strategies for adult health care, pharmacology, and the childbearing family. This RN to BSN degree adds to that by covering advanced nursing communication, and strategies for community health care. 
Our online RN to BSN program also explores post-licensure population health, leadership in nursing, nursing management, and the advanced concepts of nursing practice. Upon successful completion of our BSN nursing degree, you can feel confident and prepared to pursue positions of added responsibility in a profession that encapsulates your calling – caring for the health of people like you. 
It is important to note that transferring your RN license into our BSN degree can satisfy many of the credit hour requirements aforementioned and listed on the degree completion plan, which is linked below. For more information on which courses your RN license may satisfy, please contact Academic Advising at 800-424-9595. 
What is a BSN?
BSN stands for Bachelor of Science in Nursing – which is an undergraduate degree program for current registered nurses (RN’s). A BSN builds on the prior education and experience earned by RN’s to make students more qualified, prepared, confident, and credentialed nursing professionals. 
RN to BSN Degree Featured Courses
NURS 211 – Post-Licensure Health Assessment
NURS 325 – Nursing Concepts
NURS 446 – Post-Licensure Population Health
NURS 491 – Nursing Management
Course guides available upon request
Liberty’s RN to BSN Online Degree Program Highlights
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Nursing has a reduced tuition rate of $330 per credit hour for part- or full-time!
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
With an RN license, you will receive a minimum of 39 hours of transfer credits with no challenge tests so you can finish your degree faster.
You can complete the BSN degree in as little as 2.5 years!
You can have networking opportunities with other RNs in the program from around the country.
Obtain hands-on experience with 16 community-based observational hours."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/nursing/bachelors/rn-bsn-msn/rn-bsn-msn-nurse-educator/","Error 404
We’re sorry, that page doesn’t exist.
Try searching our website or exploring one of the additional options below.
Additional Options"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/nursing/bachelors/rn-bsn-msn/rn-bsn-msn-nursing-informatics/","Error 404
We’re sorry, that page doesn’t exist.
Try searching our website or exploring one of the additional options below.
Additional Options"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/nursing/bachelors/rn-to-bsn/global-studies/","Bring Healing to Hurting People Around the World with Our Online B.S. in Nursing (RN to BSN) – Global Studies Degree
Liberty University’s RN to BSN is one of the leading online nursing programs providing licensed, practicing registered nurses the opportunity to earn their Bachelor of Science in Nursing 100% online. You have the opportunity to earn the same excellent online BSN degree specifically tailored to a global context. This online BSN Global Studies program teaches new concepts in nursing practice while exploring healthcare delivery in countries outside of the United States.
Throughout this B.S. in Nursing degree, you will have the opportunity to examine your personal values and beliefs as they relate to the healthcare practices of other cultures. This BSN in Global Studies online degree will help you practice your communication skills as well as prepare you for ministry in another culture.
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the post-graduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.ccneaccreditation.org).
Licensure requirements may vary and are subject to change without notice. View your state’s requirements here: licensure/certification requirements.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online BSN – Global Studies Degree?
Our online B.S. in Nursing – Global Studies degree is designed with your success in mind. With an RN license, you will automatically receive a minimum total of 39 transfer credits, helping you complete our industry-leading RN to BSN degree sooner. Our BSN online degree is taught by nursing professionals who have real-world experience in clinical and leadership settings and are dedicated to supporting you as you pursue God’s call on your life.
Offered completely online, our RN to BSN in Global Studies degree allows you to remain active in your job, with your family, and in your current career without the worry of having to take courses on a traditional campus.
What are the Benefits of Liberty’s Online BSN – Global Studies Degree?
Increased job opportunities
Meets employer requirements for BSN degree
Improved patient outcomes through enhanced nursing knowledge
Opportunities for increased pay in healthcare systems
Receive Undergraduate Nursing Credit for RN Licensure
With an RN license, you will receive a minimum of 39 hours of transfer credit with no challenge tests so that you can finish your degree faster! You can also take advantage of our reduced tuition rate of $330 per credit hour for both part- and full-time, making your education more affordable!
What Will You Learn in Our BSN – Global Studies Online Degree Program?
Our students’ career goals vary, and that is why our online nursing programs are such a great fit.
Our faculty members have practiced in cardiac care, critical care, emergency medicine, med-surg, oncology, research, as nurse practitioners, and in just about every specialty and clinical and administrative setting the nursing field touches. 
You can learn from their vast years of experience as you grow in practice and leadership. 
Featured Courses
NURS 211 – Post-Licensure Health Assessment
NURS 325 – Nursing Concepts
NURS 446 – Post-Licensure Population Health
NURS 491 – Nursing Management
Course guides available upon request
Highlights of the RN to BSN – Global Studies Program Include:
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online nursing degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Nursing – Global Studies has a reduced tuition rate of $330 per credit hour for part- and full-time!
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
With an RN license, you will receive a minimum of 39 hours of transfer credit with no challenge tests so that you can finish your degree faster!
The baccalaureate degree program in nursing, master’s degree program in nursing, Doctor of Nursing Practice program, and the post-graduate APRN certificate program at Liberty University School of Nursing are accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.ccneaccreditation.org).
You can complete the BSN degree in as little as 2.5 years!
You will have networking opportunities with other RNs in the program from around the country.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/pastoral-leadership/","B.S. in Pastoral Leadership
Residential Pastoral Leadership Degree
Gain leadership dynamics along with an in-depth knowledge of the Scriptures with a Bachelor of Science in Pastoral Leadership from the Rawlings School of Divinity. We’ll prepare you for pastoral or ministry careers like senior/associate pastor, evangelist, or missions pastor. With a B.S. in Pastoral Leadership, you’ll also be equipped for graduate-level studies.
Academics: B.S. in Pastoral Leadership
Pastoral Leadership Courses
THEO 201: Theology Survey I
BIBL 324: Pastoral Epistles and Leadership Development
BIBL 480: Hermeneutics
PLED 201: Foundation to Pastoral Leadership
PLED 251: Church Planting/Development
PLED 302: Staff Management/Relations in Pastoral Leadership
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities in Pastoral Leadership
Administrative Pastor
Children’s Pastor
Christian Education Director
Church Recreation Director
Evangelist
Missions Pastor
Senior/Associate Pastor
Young Adults Minister
Approved Site Churches
All PLED majors are required to be active participants in the ministry of a local church in order to earn their degree.
Approved Site Churches"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/religion/biblical-theological-studies/","Grow in Your Faith with a B.S. in Religion – Biblical and Theological Studies Degree
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Religion – Biblical and Theological Studies degree can help prepare you to impact the world for Christ locally and globally. Throughout our online biblical and theological studies degree program, you can study topics like the history of Christianity, apologetics, and scripture teaching. 
Comparable to a bachelor of theology, our B.S. in biblical and theological studies seeks to prepare you for biblical, servant leadership in your family, the local church, and on the mission field. Our online programs are designed with your success in mind. Although many people assume that someone who gets a degree in biblical studies will go on to be a pastor, you can find that the skills you gain can be applied to many different career paths that require research, writing, analyzing, or teaching.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Biblical Studies Degree?
You can learn from professors who have real-world experience as pastors and missionaries as they teach you the practical skills you need for your current or future ministry endeavors. Our professors have a passion for helping you grow in your walk with Christ, and they will do all they can to support you throughout your online degree program as you follow God’s calling on your life. 
Here are just a few of the benefits you will find when gaining a degree from Liberty University:
Liberty University is accredited by SACSCOC, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges.
Learn from professors who have experience pastoring and planting churches, authoring Christian novels and non-fiction books, and leading archeological expeditions.
Gain access to a wide variety of resources and materials found through Liberty University’s research portal while you pursue your bachelor’s degree in religion.
Our 100% online theology degree can give you the freedom to complete your assignments around your schedule – meaning you can earn your degree and further your career without having to sacrifice your current job and time with your family and community. 
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s of Religion – Biblical and Theological Studies Degree?
If serving in ministry positions is in your future, it is essential that you know how to correctly read, interpret, and apply the Bible. By earning a bachelor’s in biblical studies degree online, you can gain valuable knowledge in areas like the history of the Christian church and the origin and history of life in the universe.
The online Bible and theology classes in this degree can provide you with a solid foundation in biblical principles that are crucial in ministry pursuits and spiritual formation. Your Christian studies will be taught by faculty committed to our mission of Training Champions for Christ as you dive into biblical interpretations and learn to connect them with the world around you.
Our online bachelor’s in religion – biblical and theological studies degree is a great foundation if you want to further your education through one of our online master’s degree programs. Your religious education will be grounded in a Christian worldview and a commitment to preparing you for a life in ministry leadership. As you pursue this program you can learn to understand the relationship between biblical theology and current theological issues.
Through this online biblical studies degree, you can learn to identify basic elements of structure within the biblical text. In addition, you can apply a methodical approach to the study of each of the primary genres of the Old and New Testaments as you continue in your online theology courses.
Featured Courses
BIBL 360 — Methodical Study of Scripture
CHHI 301 — History of the Christian Church
CRST 290 — History of Life
THEO 360 — Theological Interpretation of Scripture
Our B.S. in Biblical and Theological Studies Program Highlights
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your theology degree online from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
You will have access to a wide variety of resources and materials found through Liberty University’s research portal while you pursue your bachelor’s degree in religion.
Opportunities for additional transfer credit are available through our Experience Plus Program.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/law/bachelors/paralegal-studies/e-discovery/","Discover Your Future Career Through Our Bachelor of Science in Paralegal Studies – E-Discovery
Are you seeking an exciting career in law? Do you have an interest or experience in information technology? If you’re fascinated by the legal processes of our nation and wish to live out your faith in a growing career field that combines law and technology, Liberty’s paralegal studies degree program with a specialization in e-discovery may be right for you!
Our Bachelor of Science (BS) in Paralegal Studies – E-Discovery can help prepare you to enter the legal field. As a paralegal, you can complete various tasks that are necessary to support litigators. These tasks may include identifying, collecting, producing, preserving, and managing the discovery of relevant information. With a growing demand for professionals who are trained in the management of electronically stored information, our program is an excellent choice for acquiring this special training.
In today’s legal practice, a large amount of law office-related materials are stored in an electronic format. The practice of law is as old as our nation, but it must continue to grow and evolve as technology does. That is why Liberty offers a specialization in e-discovery – to prepare you for scenarios you will face professionally. Litigation technology professionals are an asset to law firms looking to stay on the cutting edge of the field.
Successful electronic evidence gathering and data management can make a huge difference in the time it takes to accomplish a variety of legal tasks. While electronic discovery has not yet entirely replaced the discovery of paper documents and evidence, it has greatly enhanced it and is becoming more prevalent. Our paralegal studies e-discovery degree program can prepare you for this new and exciting field.
For paralegals and legal assistants in 2021*
Available for paralegals and legal assistants in 2021*
For paralegal and legal assistant jobs through 2031*
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Paralegals and Legal Assistants (viewed online Oct. 3, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Paralegal Studies in E-Discovery Degree?
Liberty University offers a 100% online paralegal studies program with a specialization in e-discovery to help equip you for a new career path in an exciting and fast-paced area. All of our courses include the integration of a biblical worldview. A standard of excellence is expected – and in keeping with our mission to Train Champions for Christ, academic rigor is maintained. That way, you can prepare to tackle future job tasks with excellence and serve the Lord through your work.
The professors who teach this degree program’s courses have high level degrees with unimpeachable credentials to match, so you can feel confident in the quality of education that you’ll receive. By learning from our cadre of legal experts, you can become a paralegal who understands the responsibilities and moral obligations that come with working in a law office.
At Liberty, we believe that law is concerned with protecting the lives and property of people – and we train our students to model Christ through their work. By completing a BS in Paralegal Studies – E-Discovery, you can become equipped to be at the forefront of a rapidly growing field and utilize biblical ethics in your work.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Paralegal Studies in E-Discovery Degree?
When you take Liberty’s paralegal courses online, you can enhance your understanding of paralegal responsibilities through the comprehensive study of comparative legal systems. Our program of study addresses professional responsibility and ethics as minimal legal standards. You can acquire skills in scholarship, research, and communication that are fundamental to the successful development and application of paralegal policies and practices.
We teach our paralegal students to:
Apply Christian worldview principles to management responsibilities
Apply e-discovery practices to document collection and cataloging
Articulate data management methods governed by e-discovery guidelines and the laws and legal context impacting the collection and use of digital evidence
Define e-discovery case management procedures as they apply to law office practices
Describe the impact of e-discovery on the legal system and practice of law, the tools necessary to support e-discovery case management responsibilities effectively, confidentiality responsibilities as applied to e-discovery case management, the relationship between e-discovery and digital forensics, and the different types of digital evidence
Explain e-discovery methods within the context of civil and criminal practice, logistics associated with e-discovery and data management, and how forensics is used in the e-discovery process
Identify best e-discovery practices for the collection and storage of e-discovery materials
You can also learn how to apply these skills to your legal career and solve current problems in the field. Every course addresses a biblical worldview within the context of legal requirements. Multiple assignments assess understanding and mastery of ethical principles in the legal marketplace.
Featured Courses
PLST 210 – Introduction to E-Discovery
PLST 215 – Data Management and E-Discovery
PLST 310 – Case Management and Ethical Considerations
PLST 315 – Digital Forensics and the Legal Implications
Course guides coming soon
Highlights of Our Paralegal Studies – E-Discovery Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can gain skills that may give you a leg up over the competition for job positions.
You can offer a law firm expertise in a new and growing area."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/religion/christian-counseling/","Bring Hope and Healing to the Hurting with Liberty University’s Biblical Counseling Degree Online
Are you passionate about serving those who are struggling with the challenges of life? Do you want to gain a deeper understanding of Scripture and Christianity while exploring foundational topics in biblical counseling? If so, Liberty’s 100% online Bachelor of Science in Religion – Christian Counseling program may be right for you!
By pursuing your degree in Christian counseling at Liberty University, you can train to work with married couples, families, and children as well as study important concepts in apologetics and theology. Our Christian religion degree provides a solid academic foundation that can help you pursue exciting job opportunities or continue your studies at the graduate level.
Christian counseling is quite different from regular professional counseling in many ways. While biblical counseling does require an understanding of psychological principles, it also relies on Scripture as the ultimate source of truth and wisdom.
Are you excited to study biblical counseling methods and prepare for a career that lets you serve as a beacon of hope in your community? At Liberty, you can gain vital Christian counseling training and learn how to come alongside those who are hurting or in need of guidance. Partner with us and see how far your online bachelor’s degree in Christian counseling can take you!
What is Christian counseling?
Christian counseling — also called “biblical counseling” — is a unique form of counseling that blends biblical principles with psychological concepts. Christian counselors use Scripture as a guiding tool to help them serve their clients effectively and address people’s spiritual, mental, and emotional needs.
Why Choose Liberty’s BS in Religion – Christian Counseling Degree Online?
At Liberty, we seek to offer programs that meet your needs as a student and as a professional. We’ve used our extensive experience in distance education to design an online Christian counseling degree that blends flexibility, accessibility, and high-quality academics. You can receive the Christian counselor training you need to prepare for rewarding opportunities.
You can complete your Christian counseling courses 100% online without having to take time off from work to attend classes on campus. You’ll have the freedom to earn your degree from the comfort of home and stay invested in your family, job, and community as you pursue your academic goals.
Each course at Liberty is taught from a biblical worldview, which is especially crucial for those planning to go into the Christian counseling field. Our faculty are firmly rooted in the Christian faith and committed to helping you thrive in your academic and professional life. By studying under professors who have years of real-world experience, you can develop your skill set and explore best practices in Christian counseling.
Additionally, Liberty is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). You can pursue your degree with confidence knowing that our Christian counseling program has met rigorous academic standards and accreditation requirements.
What can you do with a biblical counseling degree?
Liberty’s Christian counseling degree online can help you pursue non-licensure counseling roles or positions in church counseling and outreach settings. You could also use this bachelor’s degree to pursue a career in advocacy, case management, church administration, community relations, or lay ministry. For those who already work in a related field, this program can help you strengthen your skill set and serve more effectively in your community.
If you aspire to become a licensed counselor, you’ll typically need a master’s degree — and our bachelor’s in religion – biblical counseling degree online can help provide the foundational training you need to later pursue a master’s in clinical mental health counseling. Or, if you later decide to further your non-licensure counseling expertise, our online master’s in pastoral counseling program is a great option.
What Will You Learn in Our Religion and Christian Counseling Classes Online?
By pursuing Liberty University’s religion degree with a Christian counseling specialization, you can learn how to counsel from a Christian perspective and help people discover healing that lasts through the truth of Scripture. In this program, you’ll take a mix of religion and counseling courses so you can build a diverse, marketable skill set.
As you pursue your online Christian counseling degree at Liberty, you can learn from professors who possess a passion for Christ and extensive experience in the field. Throughout your Christian counseling courses, you’ll study under licensed clinical psychologists, vocational rehabilitation counselors, clinical counselors, and crisis intervention team members. By learning from their vast years of experience, you can prepare to address practical challenges in your career.
Our core religion courses cover a variety of topics, including apologetics, the history of Christianity, church ministry, research and writing for religious disciplines, and global studies. You can grow in your knowledge of Scripture as you study under ministry professionals in our John W. Rawlings School of Divinity.
Within the Christian counseling specialization, you will explore how Christian counseling and psychology intertwine as you learn about the major challenges facing today’s generations. Additionally, our courses will introduce you to the biblical basis for using counseling as a ministry. You can also learn how to counsel children, women, or families or take a course that covers issues in human sexuality.
Featured Courses
CCOU 202 – Issues of Christian Counseling
CCOU 301 – Christian Counseling for Marriage and Family
CCOU 302 – Christian Counseling for Children
CCOU 305 – Issues in Human Sexuality
Highlights of Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Religion – Christian Counseling Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online bachelor’s degree in counseling from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You may be able to earn additional college credit through relevant life experience.
Liberty University is accredited by SACSCOC, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges.
You can access a wealth of resources through our top-notch research portal while pursuing your online Christian counseling degree."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/law/bachelors/paralegal-studies/","Join the Fight for Justice with a Paralegal Degree Online from Liberty
You cherish freedom and justice. You recognize the supreme role of our legal system in guarding these values through the law. You want to use your career to come alongside those fighting for justice in the legal realm and make a difference. With Liberty’s Bachelor of Science (BS) in Paralegal Studies online, you can put your career in the legal world on fast-forward and help uphold the law now. 
Pursue your bachelor’s degree in paralegal studies with Liberty and make your ambitions of serving justice through law a reality!
How do you become a paralegal with a bachelor’s degree? 
While some law firms only require an associate’s degree or a certification to become a paralegal, a bachelor’s in paralegal studies will give you a deeper legal knowledge, setting you apart from other applicants and helping you become a knowledgeable paralegal professional. 
A paralegal bachelor’s degree can also set you up for exciting supervisory positions as a paralegal or help prepare you for various graduate programs. With these benefits, pursuing a bachelor’s in paralegal studies can give you an edge as a paralegal and prepare you for rapid growth in your career. 
What is paralegal studies? 
Paralegals partner with attorneys, completing essential tasks so that the lawyer can better perform his or her job.
As a paralegal, you will perform legal research, such as reviewing the details of a case and examining laws and articles, preparing and writing reports and legal documents, organizing these documents in filing systems, meeting with clients, and much more.
Without paralegals, attorneys could not easily fulfill their duties and effectively defend the law. The role you’ll play as a paralegal professional is crucial – and with Liberty’s paralegal degree online, you can become an effective legal assistant who provides tremendous value to the firm or individual you serve.
What is the current job outlook for paralegals?
The need for competent, driven paralegals in the legal landscape today is growing. In fact, from 2020 to 2030, the paralegal profession is projected to grow by 12% – which is much faster than the national average of all professions.*
Paralegals are also well-compensated for their efforts, especially given the educational level required for this career. On average, a paralegal makes $56,230 per year with room for growth – especially in supervisory positions, which is higher than the national average.* No matter what area of law you’re most interested in, paralegal openings exist – and generally pay well.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Paralegal Degree?
You want more than a career — you want to make an impact. With our degree in paralegal studies, you can gain the knowledge and training you need to make a difference as a Champion for Christ in your field!
Our paralegal degree online is an industry leader in online legal programs. As a student with us, you will gain practical legal research and writing skills critical to your work while also learning the principles underlying our government and specific knowledge of various realms of law today. Additionally, you will study under expert faculty who have experience as private practice partners, lawyers and attorneys, certified public accountants, certified mediators, and just about every specialty the field of paralegal studies touches in a legal and administrative setting. 
Our Christian faith sets us apart from other schools, and in our paralegal degree program, you will understand the biblical foundations of our legal system and how to handle ethical concerns that will arise in your career in a manner consistent with a Christian worldview. 
Designed to be completed in an average of 3.5 years, our paralegal studies degree will allow you to continue to work while going to college. Because our paralegal bachelor’s degree is offered completely online, you can remain active in your job, with your family, and in your community without the worry of having to take courses on campus. Our strong academic foundation combined with our flexible online format and focus on faith will empower you to make a difference through paralegal studies.
What Will You Learn While Pursuing a Bachelor of Science in Paralegal Studies Online?
Our paralegal degree focuses on interrogating the presuppositions and foundational ideas underlying our legal system and on developing practical skills crucial to your future as a paralegal. With this combination, you will be well-prepared both to understand the legal field and to perform your duties with passion and excellence. 
You will begin your online paralegal degree learning philosophical foundations and methodologies designed to improve your understanding of today’s basic law practices. As you work through your paralegal degree online, you will gain knowledge of criminal law and procedure, which is a vital aspect of paralegal careers. 
In our paralegal bachelor degree online, you will:
Be introduced to the court system, case law, statutes, and legal research methods
Be introduced to the theories, doctrines, and practice of family law
Delve into the general principles, sources, and purpose of criminal law
Examine agency, partnership, and corporation concepts
Examine the limitations imposed on law enforcement activities
Gain hands-on experience using current legal research methods. 
Learn proper writing methods and techniques for legal writing
Study the rules and principles governing the process by which courts rule

With these skills and knowledge under your belt, you can become equipped to assist attorneys as they serve their clients and contribute to the pursuit of justice in the American legal system.
Featured Courses
GOVT 200 – Constitutional Government and Free Enterprise
PLST 205 – Foundations of Law
PLST 230 – Criminal Practice and Procedures
PLST 340 – Family Law 
Specializations for the BS in Paralegal Studies
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Paralegals and Legal Assistants (viewed online June 21, 2022). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/religion/disability-ministry/","Gain the Knowledge and Skills Needed to Integrate Underserved Populations into Local Church Communities with a Bachelor of Science in Religion – Disability Ministry
Do you wish to see better support and involvement within churches for those with disabilities? Do you want to enact change where it is needed to create more unity within the church community? Churches need staff who have special training and knowledge in the area of disability ministry to create a welcoming and successful environment.
Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Religion – Disability Ministry can help you prepare for a rewarding career working alongside those with disabilities. This program is designed to facilitate the development of a theological foundation for understanding disability ministry and the practical implications for specific ministry contexts. You can learn about the importance of engaging with and ministering to those who are marginalized by disability.
Your BS in Religion – Disability Ministry can train you to create biblically founded, disability-inclusive ministry environments that are informed by an understanding of the impact of disabilities across an individual’s lifespan. In doing so, you can help increase accessibility, hospitality, and participation within the local church. Partner with us today and take the next step toward your future.
What is the Difference Between a Bachelor of Science in Religion and a Bachelor of Science in Bible?
There are several differences between the BS in Religion and the BS in Bible. Regardless of specialization, the BS in Religion degree programs have 36 credit hours of core major courses while the BS in Bible has 51. The 2 programs share many of the same core courses, but there are several key differences.
The BS in Religion takes a broader approach to studying Christianity and its history. The origins of the church, global studies, and the history of life are studied in the religion degree program. The BS in Bible offers a more focused study of Scripture itself. This encompasses background information on both the Old and New Testaments, studies of the epistles and prophets, and analysis of the different types of books in the Bible
Why Choose Liberty’s BS in Religion – Disability Ministry Online Degree?
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Religion – Disability Ministry can prepare you for a rewarding career helping others. Ministering to those with disabilities is essential for a cohesive and unified church body. To accomplish this end, Liberty University teaches all courses from a biblical worldview. This particular method for studying disability ministry can allow you to become even more effective in helping churches reach all people.
Your Bachelor of Science in Religion – Disability Ministry is offered 100% online. This format allows you to build your foundational knowledge and develop your skills while maintaining your personal commitments. With no set login times, you are able to complete your degree on your own schedule.
Give yourself the opportunity to pursue a unique educational experience that can set you up for success and equip you to be the agent of change you want to see in the world through a Bachelor of Science in Religion – Disability Ministry from Liberty University.
What Will You Learn in the Undergraduate Religion – Disability Ministry Degree?
Your Bachelor of Science in Religion – Disability Ministry is designed to help you pursue a future career serving people with disabilities. Through your courses, you’ll have the opportunity to develop the skills needed to be effective in building, maintaining, and integrating a successful ministry focused on helping those in the church and community who have disabilities.
Courses in the BS in Religion cover a wide range of topics, so you can be confident that your education is well-rounded. Subjects include methodical study of Scripture, survey of the history of Christianity, research and writing for religious disciplines, and practical teaching of Scripture. You can also dive deep into studies of apologetics, books of the Bible such as Acts and Romans, church ministries, history of life, global studies, and biblical theology.
The specialization is built with a central focus on what makes a successful disability ministry. You can become equipped with the knowledge and tools needed to make a profound difference. Courses cover what disability ministry looks like in the church, how to foster accessibility and inclusion within a local church, approaches to congregational care with an understanding of disability ministry, and practical application of the theology of disability.
Featured Courses
CHMN 325 – Introduction to Disability Ministry in the Church
CHMN 350 – Accessibility and Inclusion in Church Ministry
CLCM 415 – Congregational Care in Disability Ministry
THEO 305 – Theology of Disability
Course guides coming soon
Highlights of Our BS in Religion – Disability Ministry Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You can finish the bachelor’s in religion – disability ministry in as little as 3.5 years!
Become specialized in a type of ministry that your church might not yet offer and help your congregation reach more people."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/religion/christian-leadership/","Lead the Church with Our B.S. in Religion – Christian Leadership Degree
Do you have a passion to lead the local church toward Christ? If so, then Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Religion – Christian Leadership may be the degree for you! Our Christian leadership degree will blend biblical studies with leadership training so that you can be better prepared to impact others!
With a concentration in Christian leadership, you can gain a strong theological foundation on which you can develop and build your leadership and management abilities. You will also study the most effective ways to set goals, create collaboration between members of a church staff, develop strategies, and manage the priorities and needs of your organization. Ultimately, pursuing this degree can help you be better prepared to serve as a pastor, administrator, program director, or Christian leader.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online B.S. in Religion – Christian Leadership and Management Degree?
At Liberty, you can pursue your degree while you remain engaged with your family, church, and community. With no set login times, you can complete your education at your own pace from the comfort of your own home.
As you work toward Liberty’s online ministry degree, you will be taught by professors who care deeply for you and whose desire is to see you succeed. Our professors are seasoned experts and have advanced degrees in their field. In addition, Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC), meaning that your degree has met rigorous educational standards — so you can be confident that you are receiving a world-class education. 
We believe that your degree should be both of high quality and at an affordable price. That is why while other Christian leadership schools have raised tuition, Liberty has continued to freeze our tuition rates for the past 8 years and counting. In addition, Liberty has covered the cost of textbooks through our Inclusive Access initiative. You can rest assured that we are dedicated to the quality and affordability of your degree.
What Will You Learn in Our B.S. in Religion – Christian Management Degree?
At Liberty University, our bachelor’s degrees provide you with essential general education courses in subjects like English, math, science, and philosophy. In your major courses, you will examine the historical and philosophical arguments that support the validity of the Word of God, explore the teachings and applications of books of the Bible, and study different cultures and people groups around the world.
Our courses in Christian leadership explore a broad range of biblical leadership principles and strategies that you can use for personal growth, in your local church, and in your community. By pursuing a Christian leadership major, you can better understand the many different leadership roles within the church, from the role of Christian ministers to the importance of lay workers. You will also examine the challenges facing church leaders today as well as practical steps on how to overcome these obstacles. Our religion degree can give you the tools you need to present God’s Word with meaning and application.
Featured Courses
CLED 300 – Biblical and Theological Foundations of Christian Leadership
CLED 325 – Critical Issues in Ministry Leadership
CLED 365 – Personal Development of a Leader
CLED 450 – Organization and Leadership in Ministry 
Bachelor’s in Religion – Christian Leadership Program Highlights
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online religion degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Tuition for all undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs has not increased in 8 years. While many other online colleges have raised tuition, Liberty has been able to keep costs low as a nonprofit university. 
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You will have access to a wide variety of resources and materials found through Liberty University’s Library research portal while you pursue your bachelor’s degree.
You can potentially earn credit through relevant life experience.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/religion/christian-ministries/","Prepare to Be the Hands and Feet of Christ with a Bachelor of Science in Christian Ministry
Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science in Religion – Christian Ministries degree can equip you to serve in a wide range of church ministry positions. Whether you’re looking to launch your ministry career or pursue advanced studies at the graduate or doctoral level, we can help you achieve your goals.
In this program, you will dig deep into the Bible and gain relevant skills to serve wherever God calls you. You’ll develop a better understanding of Christian service so that you can effectively minister to people of all age groups. Partner with us and train to become a Champion for Christ in your church and community.
What is a Christian ministry degree?
At its core, ministry involves spreading the Gospel to nonbelievers, helping Christians grow in their faith, and sharing God’s love with all people. Those who work in Christian ministry seek to meet the needs of other people — both in the church and out in the community. While spiritual needs are the primary focus, Christian ministry can also include meeting people’s physical, emotional, and financial needs, among others. That way, you can truly be the hands and feet of Jesus and serve others out of unconditional, Christlike love.
There are many different ministry opportunities to choose from, depending on your skills, interests, and calling. From music and counseling to teaching and outreach, Christian ministry offers a valuable opportunity to serve believers and nonbelievers alike.
What degree do I need to be a pastor?
If you want to become a pastor, Liberty’s B.S. in Religion – Christian Ministries is a great starting point. Typically, churches expect pastors to earn a Master of Divinity (MDiv) degree. After completing our bachelor’s in Christian ministries, you can pursue one of our online MDiv degrees and take the next step in your journey to becoming a pastor.
Why Choose Liberty University’s Christian Ministries Degree Program?
As pioneers in distance learning, we’re committed to offering an education that fits your schedule. Liberty’s ministries degree is offered 100% online and has no set login times. You can complete your classes from the comfort of your home and easily access your course materials whenever you need them. Most importantly, you can stay invested in the things that really matter — like your family, job, church, and community — while still achieving your academic and professional goals.
In this program, you’ll learn from professors who have years of experience working in ministry. Drawing on what they have learned in their own careers, they can equip you with the practical, on-the-job skills needed to succeed in Christian ministry. Our curriculum is based on cutting-edge research, allowing you to receive an education that prepares you for the real world.
Liberty University’s online Christian college experience is unparalleled. We offer quality academics, affordable tuition rates, and top-notch instruction from professors who care about your success. All of our classes are taught from a biblical worldview, allowing you to grow in your personal walk with Christ and effectively serve others through Christian ministry.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Christian Bachelor of Science in Religion Program?
Our bachelor’s in religion provides the foundational knowledge and real-world training you need to conduct ministry in your church, community, or organization.
Our core courses dive into many important topics, including apologetics, the history of Christianity, and global studies. You’ll also take an in-depth look at Acts and Romans so that you can understand the scriptural basis for Christian ministry. By studying the best methods for teaching Scripture, you can share the Gospel with people of all ages and construct Bible lessons that are meaningful, fruitful, and doctrinally sound. Within the Christian ministries specialization, you can mix and match various courses to meet your unique ministry goals.
Explore how to apply biblical leadership principles and strategies to your local church or organization. Our religion program will give you the tools you need to present God’s Word in a way that inspires purpose and real-world application. You’ll also learn how to conduct academic research and writing within religious disciplines. That way, you can communicate the Gospel effectively and dive deeper into Scripture.
At the end of this program, you’ll complete a capstone course in order to synthesize what you’ve learned and apply your knowledge to real-world issues. After earning this degree, you can complete one of our online divinity master’s programs to help further your knowledge, expand your career opportunities, and increase your effectiveness in ministry. 
Highlights of Liberty’s Christian Ministries Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting. 
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our online courses are only 8 weeks long, with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
You could earn academic credit for life experience through our Experience Plus program.
As an online Liberty student, you can access a wealth of resources through our top-notch research portal.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/religion/evangelism/","Spread the Gospel around the World with Liberty’s Online Bachelor’s Degree in Evangelism
Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Religion – Evangelism is proud to partner with the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association’s School of Evangelism Online to develop classes that can prepare you to spread the gospel in any career you choose. Through these classes, you will grow in your understanding of foundational theology in areas such as the gospel, the fall of man, and the Great Commission.
Since our relationship with Christ is not dependent on us as individuals, we will explore the importance of sharing the gospel message through the power of the Holy Spirit. We are confident that a degree focused on evangelism will help reinforce the vital role that prayer and walking in the fullness of the Spirit play in the process of reaching the lost.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online B.S. in Religion – Evangelism Degree?
We know you want more than a career – you want to make an impact. Liberty offers the solid, biblical foundation necessary to better serve in your ministry-related role. Liberty’s bachelor’s in religion – evangelism degree is offered completely online. This can allow you to remain active in your job, with your family, and in your community without the worry of having to take courses on campus. 
Additionally, our courses are taught by seasoned professionals who have years of experience in ministry and evangelism. With their guidance, you can hone your skills and become better equipped to spread the truth of Christ in your community. Liberty is also accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) – so you can be confident that you’re earning a degree of the highest quality.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Evangelism Program?
Liberty University’s online evangelism classes provide a solid biblical foundation, making you capable of demonstrating your knowledge of the structure, content, and principles of biblical interpretation. Each course within the evangelism specialization is designed to help strengthen your relationship with Christ as you learn how to share the gospel effectively with others. Topics covered will present a broad introduction to major themes, issues, and ideas as well as teach you how to articulate and justify truths that are essential to evangelical Christianity.
Your professors will give guidance on how to approach ministry-specific situations as you discover your strengths and weaknesses when evangelizing to others. Upon graduation, you will be prepared to share your personal testimony, as well as feel confident in presenting the gospel to nonbelievers.
Featured Courses
EVAN 201 – Preparation and Personal Evangelism
EVAN 220 – Effective Message Preparation in Evangelism
EVAN 301 – Evangelism and the Work of the Holy Spirit
EVAN 401 – Discipleship in Evangelism
Bachelor’s in Religion – Evangelism Program Highlights 
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Tuition for all undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs has not increased in 8 years. While many other online colleges have raised tuition, Liberty has been able to keep costs low as a nonprofit university. 
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-$2,000 per year on textbooks!
Receive access to the ministry rationale and hallmark resources associated with the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association’s Schools of Evangelism Online.
You will have access to a wide variety of resources and materials found through Liberty University’s Jerry Falwell Library search portal while you pursue your bachelor’s degree in religion.
You may earn additional credit through relevant life experience.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/religion/global-studies/","Reach the World for Christ with Our BS in Religion – Global Studies Degree
Are you interested in working with different cultures and nations? Our Bachelor of Science in Religion – Global Studies degree is designed to help sharpen your understanding of global societies and the nuances of different cultures. With training in religion and an understanding of various nations, you can be more prepared to impact the nations in a variety of ways.
Understanding the importance of the differences in the international community is of utmost importance. With an education at Liberty, you can be confident in your ability to effectively work with people who are from a mix of different cultures.
If you are searching for a degree that can help you contribute to humanitarian needs, work with non-government organizations (NGOs), or meet spiritual or physical needs overseas, then our degree in global studies may be for you.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online BS in Religion – Global Studies Degree?
With our BS in global studies, you can foster an understanding of world religions and global issues so that you can effectively reach others. As you pursue your degree in global studies, your classes will be taught by talented faculty who have years of experience working internationally and who have advanced degrees in related areas of study. Our professors are dedicated to providing you with an education that can go the distance when working with people from all corners of the globe.
At Liberty, we believe that your degree should be accessible and affordable. That’s why our global studies degree is 100% online with no set login times. In addition, while other online Bible colleges and seminaries have raised their tuition, Liberty has not increased tuition in 8 years. With flexibility and affordability like this, you can remain invested in your family, job, and community while pursuing a top-notch education.
At Liberty, you can be confident that you are receiving a world-class education. Whether you are just getting started or have years of experience in international settings, a degree in global studies can help you take the next step in achieving your goals.
Common Questions
What is a global studies degree?
Is global studies a good major? 
What is the difference between a global studies and international studies degree?
What kind of job can I get with a global studies degree? 
What Will You Learn in Our BS in Religion – Global Studies Degree?
In our global studies degree, you will study different cultures and how to communicate effectively across cultural barriers. At Liberty, we seek to partner with you so that you can reach the ends of the earth with the training you receive. You will also dive into important aspects of international ministry from professors who have been around the world and have firsthand experience with different cultures. You can learn about how to interact with various cultures and how to effectively reach different people groups. 
Throughout this program, you will study a variety of subjects, including: 
Beliefs of different religious movements
Different cultural traditions and practices
Historical/geographical development of major world religions
Intercultural communication
With a deeper understanding of these subjects, you can be better equipped to reach diverse groups and nations.
Featured Courses
ETHM 411 – Music and Culture
GLST 290 – Cultural Anthropology*
GLST 385 – Career Preparation for Global Workers*
RLGN 340 – Global Religious Movements
*Course guides available upon request
Bachelor’s in Religion – Global Studies Program Highlights
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online bachelor’s degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Tuition for all undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs has not increased in 8 years. While many other online colleges have raised tuition, Liberty has been able to keep costs low as a nonprofit university. 
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks.
You have the potential to earn additional credit through relevant life experience.
Liberty graduates are frequently sought after for employment opportunities for their integrity, personal discipline, and quality.
As you pursue your BS in Religion degree, you will have access to a wide variety of resources through Liberty’s research portal.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/religion/digital-discipleship/","Discover, Inspire, and Shepherd Online Audiences with Liberty’s B.S. in Religion – Digital Discipleship Degree
Are you looking to combine your love of religious studies with additional knowledge in digital discipleship ministries? Maybe you want to share the Gospel with as many people as possible, and you’re looking for a degree that can help you do just that. If so, Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Religion – Digital Discipleship can help equip you with essential skills that you can use to share God’s Word with digital audiences across the world.
Christianity provides truth that transcends time and medium. The growth of social media and digital platforms has created an entirely new opportunity for virtual discipleship. Because digital discipleship and evangelism is an emerging field, you may find that you lack the knowledge needed to successfully make disciples of Christ on virtual platforms. That’s why we created our digital evangelism and discipleship degree — to help you grow in your faith while learning in-demand digital media skills that can be used for God’s glory.
Our B.S. in Religion – Digital Discipleship is designed to help you strengthen your faith, develop valuable ministry skills, and become a Champion for Christ in a world that desperately needs the Gospel. Partner with us to learn skills that can help you make a difference in the world.
Why Choose Liberty’s B.S. in Religion – Digital Discipleship Degree?
At Liberty, we understand that you can’t afford to put your life on hold while working towards your degree. Our B.S. in Religion is offered 100% online in 8-week terms with no set login times, so you can complete your coursework when it is most convenient for you. Characterized by a strong, unwavering commitment to Scripture, our B.S. in Religion can help you understand and overcome challenges commonly faced by Christian leaders.
Our bachelor’s degree in religion is taught by experienced professionals who have years of experience in various forms of Christian ministry. Additionally, Liberty’s own successful history of digital discipleship has spanned decades — we’ve been pioneering distance education since 1985. If digital discipleship is a skill you would like to learn more about, choose a university that has helped lead students to Christ for years through a virtual format.
What Will You Learn in Our B.S. in Religion – Digital Discipleship Degree?
Liberty’s bachelor’s degree in religion online offers you an in-depth study of the Christian faith. You will begin by studying both the Old and New Testaments as well as the basics of systematic theology. From there, your courses move into more advanced religious studies — including apologetics, Christian history, biblical theology, Acts, and Romans.
At Liberty, we strive to create impactful difference-makers who can articulate and defend the essential truths of evangelical Christianity. Our professors will challenge you to demonstrate skill in navigating, explaining, and applying the Bible to contemporary settings, including digital media.
The digital discipleship specialization can help you attract and shepherd believers using online platforms. In the digital discipleship and evangelism courses, you will study the biblical and theological underpinnings of digital ministry, methods for building community on virtual platforms, and techniques for developing a thriving digital ministry.
Featured Courses
CLCM 301 – Biblical and Theological Foundations of Digital Ministry
CLCM 350 – Formation and Community in Digital Ministry
CLCM 401 – Digital Discipleship
CLCM 450 – Digital Ministry Development and Administration
Highlights of Our B.S. in Religion – Digital Discipleship Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Tuition for all undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs has not increased in 8 years. While many other online colleges have raised tuition, Liberty has been able to keep costs low as a nonprofit university. 
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
You will have access to a wide variety of resources and materials found through Liberty University’s Jerry Falwell Library search portal while pursuing your degree.
You could potentially earn college credit for relevant life experience.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/religion/humanitarian-action-and-human-rights/","Take Action in a Crisis and Defend the Defenseless with a Bachelor of Science Degree in Religion – Humanitarian Action and Human Rights
We live in a broken and fallen world. Crises arise internationally on almost a daily basis. Who steps up to help? Who advocates for those whose rights are being violated? Who shows the love of Christ to every man, woman, and child they meet regardless of race, nationality, cultural, or religious background? With Liberty’s Bachelor of Science (BS) in Religion – Humanitarian Action and Human Rights degree program, you can.
If you are interested in learning more about the history of Christianity and serving in nonprofit humanitarian response organizations, local churches, and non-governmental organizations, our 100% online degree program in religion with a focus on humanitarian action and human rights may be a great fit for you. As churches and faith-based non-governmental organizations (NGOs) respond to increasing needs in local communities and around the world, there is a growing necessity for evangelical leaders with solid foundations in Scripture and theology to address human rights issues and humanitarian response. By completing our program, you can take an in-depth look at how Christianity has grown and developed over time and how Christians can help others in need.
What Is the Difference Between a Bachelor of Science in Religion and a Bachelor of Science in Bible?
There are several differences between the BS in Religion and the BS in Bible. Regardless of specialization, the BS in Religion degree programs have 36 credit hours of core major courses while the BS in Bible has 51 credit hours of core major courses. The 2 programs share many of the same core courses, but there are several key differences.
The BS in Religion takes a broader approach to studying Christianity and its history. The origins of the church, global studies, and the history of life are also studied in the religion degree program. The BS in Bible offers a more focused study of Scripture itself. This encompasses background information on both the Old and New Testaments, studies of the epistles and prophets, and analysis of the different types of books in the Bible.
Why Choose Liberty’s Religion – Humanitarian Action and Human Rights Degree?
Liberty University has been dedicated to Training Champions for Christ since our founding in 1971. We accomplish this mission by providing world-class education with a biblical worldview in many disciplines. As a Christian university, our religion degree programs are a hallmark of our school. If your goal is to work for a nonprofit organization focusing on humanitarian action and human rights, earning your degree from a nonprofit, Christian university like Liberty can help set you apart.
The purpose of this program is part of a greater vision of the John W. Rawlings School of Divinity – to come alongside the local church, train leaders in humanitarian action and human rights, and help the helpless. You can learn to increase your compassion and love for others through Liberty.
Our Bachelor of Science in Religion – Humanitarian Action and Human Rights is offered 100% online, this offers more flexibility than a standard residential program. At Liberty, you can take courses at your own pace. This can allow you to serve or work in humanitarian aid settings while earning your degree. Our degree also allows you to maintain your personal commitments as you pursue your education.
We seek to foster the fruit of the Spirit in our students by providing dedicated faculty and staff. Our faculty can help you grow those fruits through the coursework and meaningful interaction. You can continue the development of these attributes within yourself and others as you grow in the knowledge and application of the field of religion and of humanitarian action and human rights.
With our Bachelor of Science in Religion – Humanitarian Action and Human Rights, you can also be prepared to pursue our Master of Divinity degree if you would like to become a pastor or a director of a ministry or apologetics organization.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Religion – Humanitarian Action and Human Rights Degree?
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Religion has a curriculum rooted deeply in Scripture. You will take courses analyzing the history of Christianity and how it has been studied in the past as well as the history of life. The classes that make up the program also cover introductions to apologetics, church ministries, and global studies. You will explore methods for studying the Bible, research and writing for religious disciplines, and practical teaching of Scripture. Both Acts and Romans are discussed in-depth. You will also complete a capstone to culminate the core major courses.
The specialization in humanitarian action and human rights includes courses that will introduce you to actions that humanitarians take. You can become equipped to address issues in areas such as:
Disaster relief
Human rights violations
Human trafficking
The sanctity of human life
Trauma healing
Your coursework will introduce you to the field of humanitarian action and allow you to explore the related theological foundations. Two courses discuss the theology of humanitarian response and the theological foundations for human rights. Based on the Judeo-Christian ethic of universal benevolence, the courses can give you a firm grasp of the principles we must uphold and defend for vulnerable populations globally.
Emphasis will be placed on principles of sustainable relief that do not harm the local economy and that maintain the dignity of those assisted. The specialization also includes a humanitarian action in praxis course that can give you real-world knowledge of how humanitarian assistance is carried out.
Featured Courses
CLCM 205 – Introduction to Humanitarian Action
CLCM 475 – Humanitarian Action in Praxis
THEO 320 – A Theology of Humanitarian Response
THEO 325 – Theological Foundations for Human Rights
Highlights of Our Humanitarian Action and Human Rights Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Prepare to meet the needs of others who are desperate and hurting in a local, national, or international setting with your training.
Strengthen your biblical and theological foundations so you can better help others.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/religious-studies/","B.S. in Religious Studies
Residential Religious Studies Program
Gain the knowledge and skills necessary to become a leader in ministry. When you get a B.S. in Religious Studies, you’ll have the option of tailoring your degree with a concentration like Biblical Languages or Theology and Apologetics from the Rawlings School of Divinity at Liberty University.
Cognates for the B.S. in Religious Studies 
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities
Christian Educator
Church Leadership
Evangelism
Missions
Para-church Ministries
Graduate School/Seminary"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/religious-studies/biblical-languages/","Residential Degree in Religious Studies: Biblical Languages
Learn how to read and study the Bible in its original languages – Hebrew and Greek with the Bachelor of Science in Religious Studies: Biblical Languages degree from Liberty University.
The B.S. in Religious Studies: Biblical Languages gives you a general knowledge of the Bible, church history, apologetics, and hermeneutical methodology while offering a targeted focus on Biblical Languages. This will help prepare you for your ministry career and equip you to relevantly engage the culture with the truth of the Gospel.
The Biblical Languages cognate will prepare you for biblical scholarship at the highest levels, especially as it relates to interpreting biblical texts.
Academics: Biblical Languages Cognate
Featured Biblical Languages Courses
Apologetics & Cultural Engagement (APOL 201) 
Greek Syntax & Reading (GREK 302)
Greek Exegesis (GREK 401)
Hermeneutics (BIBL 480)
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities in Religion & Biblical Languages
Christian Educator
Church Leadership
Evangelism
Missions
Para-church Ministries
Graduate School/Seminary"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/divinity/bachelors/religion/next-generation-ministries/","Disciple Tomorrow’s Leaders with a Religion Degree in Next Generation Ministries
With Liberty’s B.S. in Religion – Next Generation Ministries degree, you can learn how to create safe environments across ministry programs, design a spiritual formation strategy for the family, actively engage in student ministry, and develop the leadership skills necessary to lead in the local church. Whether you intend to lead on campus or as a youth pastor, a degree in NextGen ministry can help you provide purposeful and intentional ministry to the youth of future generations. At Liberty, you won’t just learn to impact young adults for Christ — you can become equipped to actively engage the younger generation and prepare students for their future with a student ministry degree.
Additionally, a bachelor’s degree in religion can help you work in ministry organizations or prepare to attend seminary through our John W. Rawlings School of Divinity. Liberty’s rich history as a Christian university with graduates serving around the globe makes pursuing our B.S. in Religion – NextGen a great choice to advance your educational career!
Why Choose Our Online Religion Degree in Next Generation Ministries?
Liberty University is one of the largest Christian universities in the world with a unique mission of Training Champions for Christ. At the John W. Rawlings School of Divinity, you will see our mission in action and discover ways to meaningfully equip the next generation of young people to meet the needs of believers and unbelievers alike. In this program, you can learn from professors who have the same passion for ministry as you do and who have served in both professional and leadership settings as pastors, missionaries, and educators.
With a NextGen youth ministry degree, you can gain the skills you need to impact families and communities where they are while maintaining the biblical rigor that you expect with a bachelor’s degree in religion. The real-world applications you gain through a NextGen ministry degree will be valuable to both you and your community — allowing you to make an impact for Christ and teach others to do the same. 
Our Bachelor of Science in Religion – NextGen degree is offered completely online, giving you the freedom to personalize your degree to best fit your schedule. Additionally, our online courses have no set login times, which gives you the flexibility to study whenever and wherever you need to. 
Earning a degree that is focused on the next generation of ministry and the nuances of the 21st century, like our B.S. in Religion – Next Gen, is a crucial way to impact the world for Christ!
Common Questions 
Below are some common questions you may have about this program:
What is NextGen?
How do I connect with the next generation?
How do I become a youth pastor?
What is the difference between a youth pastor and a campus pastor?
What Will You Learn in Liberty’s Religion – NextGen Degree?
With a future in next generation ministry, it is essential that you know how to work with youth from early childhood through young adulthood as well as with their families. Through this degree, you can develop the problem-solving skills needed to apply biblical principles to contemporary issues that are prevalent for ministry leaders to reach the next generation.
With classes that discuss the theology of the family, campus ministry, and theological interpretation of Scripture, you can be prepared to impact your community in a unique and practical way. Your courses will be taught by faculty who are committed to Training Champions for Christ and equipping you with a solid biblical foundation in crucial aspects associated with ministry. 
In our B.S. in Religion – NextGen degree program, you can learn how to prepare children in real-life situations. You will be able to analyze the role of youth ministry within the context of the local church, describe biblical philosophy and how it relates to youth ministry, apply a biblical framework for understanding families and the roles within a family, and much more.
A Bachelor of Science in Religion – NextGen degree is also a great foundation to further your education through one of Liberty’s online master’s degree programs down the road.
Featured Courses
THEO 330 – Theology of the Family
THEO 360 – Theological Interpretation of Scripture
YOUT 201 – Survey of Youth Ministries 
YOUT 350 – Campus Ministry
Highlights of Our NextGen Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online B.S. in Religion degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty graduates are frequently sought after for employment opportunities for their integrity, personal discipline, and quality.
Students enrolled in our bachelor’s in religion degree will have access to a wide variety of resources through Liberty’s research portal."
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/religious-studies/new-testament/","Residential Degree in Religious Studies: New Testament
Gain a general knowledge of the Bible, church history, apologetics, and hermeneutical methodology with Liberty’s B.S. in Religious Studies program. Through this program, you’ll be able to engage with today’s culture and affirm the truth of the Gospel.
Explore New Testament texts and their historical contexts with a Bachelor of Science in Religious Studies: New Testament degree. Study the Apostle Paul’s instructions for church leadership. By examining the backgrounds and theology of the New Testament, you’ll be prepared for a leadership role in ministry.
Academics: New Testament Cognate
Featured New Testament Courses
John (BIBL 323)
Acts (BIBL 364)
Pastoral Epistles & Leadership Development (BIBL 324)
New Testament Theology (BIBL 460)
New Testament Backgrounds (BIBL 472)
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities With This Degree
Christian educator
Church leader
Evangelism
Missions
Para-church ministries
Graduate school / Seminary"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/religious-studies/global-studies/","Residential Degree in Religious Studies: Global Studies
The Bachelor of Science in Religious Studies: Global Studies degree provides you with in-depth training in religious studies, including theology, apologetics, world religions, and intercultural engagement. 
Expand your understanding of cross-cultural engagement. Learn how to build relationships, a career, and a life internationally. Gain insight into the unique dynamics that come with living and working overseas.
With the Global Studies cognate, you’ll receive in-depth training in Cultural Intelligence and be given opportunities to interact with global workers from all backgrounds.
Academics: Global Studies Cognate
Featured Global Studies Courses
Cultural Anthropology (GSLT 290)
Career Preparation for Global Workers (GLST 385)
Trends and Issues in Global Studies (GLST 490)
Global Studies Internship (GLST 499)
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities With This Degree
Church Leadership
Global Engagement
Graduate Studies
.
Christian Educator
Para-church Ministries
Evangelism"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/religious-studies/old-testament/","Residential Degree in Religious Studies: Old Testament
Gain a general knowledge of the Bible, church history, apologetics, and hermeneutical methodology with Liberty’s B.S. in Religious Studies program. Through this program, you’ll be able to engage with today’s culture and affirm the truth of the Gospel.
Delve deeper into the history and religion of ancient Israel with the Bachelor of Science in Religious Studies: Old Testament degree. Study the structure, stories, and characters of the Old Testament. Explore the poetry in the books of Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, and Lamentations. 
With this degree, you’ll focus on key issues of the Old Testament, including chronology, Creation, the Fall, the Flood, and the patriarchal cultural setting of ancient Israel.
Academics: Old Testament Cognate
Featured Old Testament Courses
Old Testament Poetical Books (BIBL 314)
Isaiah (BIBL 316)
Genesis (BIBL 410)
Old Testament Theology (BIBL 461)
Old Testament Backgrounds (BIBL 473)
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities With This Degree
Christian educator
Church leader
Evangelism
Missions
Para-church ministries
Graduate school / Seminary"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/religious-studies/theology-apologetics/","Residential Degree in Religious Studies: Theology & Apologetics
Discover how to relate the major doctrines in the Bible to contemporary theological and apologetic issues, with the Bachelor of Science in Religious Studies: Theology and Apologetics degree from Liberty University.
The B.S. in Religious Studies: Theology and Apologetics gives you a general knowledge of the Bible, church history, apologetics, and hermeneutical methodology while offering you a targeted focus on theology and apologetics. Prepare for your ministry career and get equipped to relevantly engage the culture with the truth of the Gospel.
The Theology and Apologetics cognate will help you understand how to relate major biblical doctrines to current theological and apologetic issues while giving you a basic knowledge of philosophy. It will also introduce you to the various world religions and the Christian apologetic response.
Academics: Theology & Apologetics Cognate
Featured Theology & Apologetics Courses
Foundational Issues in Apologetics (APOL 311)
Christianity & the Cults (APOL 325)
The Church: Its Mission & Hope (THEO 412)
Modern & Contemporary Theology (THEO 430)
Get Started with Your Degree
Career Opportunities in Theology & Apologetics
Christian Educator
Church Leadership
Evangelism
Missions
Parachurch Ministries
Graduate School/Seminary"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/b-a-religious-studies-bible-and-theology/","Residential Religious Studies: Bible and Theology Degree
Develop an understanding of the Bible, biblical languages, and theology with a Religious Studies (B.A.): Bible and Theology degree from Liberty University. Gain familiarity with the Old and New Testaments and learn about core theological doctrines and their applications to daily life. Equip yourself with experience in the original languages of biblical texts through Greek and Hebrew studies.
With the liberal arts component of this B.A. degree, you will complete 24 hours of language courses in Greek and Hebrew. This will equip you to engage in detail with the original language of biblical texts. These hours of language study are in addition to the biblical and theological focus of this program. 
Study under highly qualified professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and dedicated to your success. Enhance your future ministry and vocational goals through practical training and knowledge of what it can look like to live out the calling of Christ in the modern world.
Explore more electives with the residential: B.S. in Religious Studies: Bible and Theology
Academics: B.A. in Religious Studies: Bible and Theology
Featured Religious Studies: Bible and Theology Courses
Faith, Reason & the Search for Meaning (APOL 250) 
Greek Syntax and Reading (GREK 302)
Methods & Issues in Theology (THEO 350)
Greek Exegesis (GREK 401) 
Get Started with Your Religious Studies Degree
Career Opportunities With This Degree
Church Ministry Staff
Parachurch Ministry Staff
Teacher
Christian Education
Evangelist
Missionary"
"https://www.liberty.edu/divinity/bachelors/b-s-religious-studies-bible-and-theology/","Residential Religious Studies: Bible and Theology Degree
Develop an understanding of the Bible, biblical languages, and theology with a Religious Studies (B.S.): Bible and Theology degree from Liberty University. Gain familiarity with the Old and New Testaments and learn about core theological doctrines and their applications to daily life. Equip yourself with experience in the original languages of biblical texts through Greek and Hebrew studies.
Take more electives with this B.S. degree.
Study under highly qualified professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and dedicated to your success. Enhance your future ministry and vocational goals through practical training and knowledge of what it can look like to live out the calling of Christ in the modern world.
Gain an even greater understanding of Greek and Hebrew with the: B.A. in Religious Studies: Bible and Theology
Academics: B.S. in Religious Studies: Bible and Theology Degree
Featured Religious Studies Courses
Spiritual Foundations for the Christian Life (CLCM 200)
Faith, Reason, & the Search for Meaning (APOL 250)
Foundational Issues in Apologetics (APOL 311)
Methods & Issues in Theology (THEO 350)
Get Started with Your Religious Studies Degree
Career Opportunities With This Degree
Church Ministry Staff
Parachurch Ministry Staff
Teacher
Christian Education 
Evangelist
Missionary"
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/respiratory-therapy/","B.S. in Respiratory Therapy
Residential Respiratory Therapy Program
Prepare for an exciting career in respiratory therapy where you can play an integral role in the healthcare profession. With the Bachelor of Science in Respiratory Therapy (BSRT) from Liberty University, you’ll get hands-on learning as you participate in seminars, engage in lab experiences, and perform clinical training in hospitals.
Choose between two pathways to your degree. Get the residential BSRT if you are new to the field, or the online BSRT (Post-Licensure) if you are already a practicing respiratory therapist with a Registered Respiratory Therapist (RRT) credential.
Here, you’ll learn from experienced and credentialed faculty and train with therapists, physicians, and nurses as you get your degree. This will prepare you to collaborate professionally with all members of the healthcare profession.
In addition to your core courses in respiratory therapy, you’ll also participate in clinical education courses. These courses incorporate a clinical component that includes practical experience, allowing you to develop as a competent professional under the supervision of a preceptor.
The B.S. in Respiratory Therapy degree is offered through the Department of Allied Health Professions.
Who Are Respiratory Therapists?
Where Can a Bachelor’s Degree Lead You?
Learn How To:
Analyze breath and blood specimens
Perform physical exams
Respond to Code Blue and other urgent calls
Help diagnose lung and breathing disorders
Manage ventilators and artificial airway devices
Provide inhalation medications
Administer therapeutic inhaled gases such as oxygen, nitric oxide, and helium
Educate patients and families about lung disease
Perform airway clearance therapy
Degree Options
B.S. in Respiratory Therapy (BSRT)
With our BSRT residential degree, you’ll learn how to perform patient assessment, develop and monitor respiratory care plans, carry out disease management and rehabilitation, and serve as a physician extender to other healthcare professionals.
Once you graduate, you’ll be eligible to take and pass the national board exams for certification, become registered as an advanced-level respiratory therapist, and take specialty exams in perinatal/pediatrics and pulmonary function technology.
B.S. in Respiratory Therapy (BSRT): Post Licensure
Enhance your current career with our BSRT: Post-Licensure online degree. Qualify for a promotion or for positions in this field that require a bachelor’s degree, such as disease manager, case manager, clinical specialist, manager, or director.
Academics: Respiratory Therapy (BSRT)
Courses You Could Take
Respiratory Care Equipment & Techniques (RESP 302)
Neonatal Respiratory Care (RESP 320)
Pediatric Respiratory Care (RESP 321)
Respiratory Pharmacology (RESP 324)
Critical Respiratory Care (RESP 400)
Pulmonary Disease Management (RESP 408)
Start Your Respiratory Therapy Career
*You must apply and be accepted to Liberty before accessing the BRST Program application.
Admissions Requirements for Residential BSRT
B.S. in Respiratory Therapy – Click to View
Career Opportunities as a Respiratory Therapist
Generalist
Neonatal/Pediatrics
Adult Critical Care
Transport
Pulmonary Function Testing
Sleep Medicine
Pulmonary/Cardiac Rehabilitation
Homecare
Case Manager
Disease Manager
Clinical Specialist
Researcher
Supervisor
Manager
Director
Accreditation
The B.S. Degree Entry into Respiratory Therapy Practice, CoARC program number 200640, B.S. in Respiratory Therapy, in Lynchburg, Virginia, the program holds Provisional Accreditation from the Commission on Accreditation for Respiratory Care (www.coarc.com).
This status signifies that a program with an Approval of Intent has demonstrated sufficient compliance with the Standards (through submission of an acceptable Provisional Accreditation Self Study Report (PSSR) and any other documentation required by the CoARC, as well as satisfactory completion of an initial on-site visit, to be allowed to admit students. It is recognized as an accredited program by the National Board for Respiratory Care (NBRC), which provides enrolled students who complete the program with eligibility for the Respiratory Care Credentialing Examination(s). The program will remain on Provisional Accreditation until it achieves Continuing Accreditation.
The CoARC’s outcomes webpage https://coarc.com/students/programmatic-outcomes-data/
CoARC accredits respiratory therapy education programs in the United States. To achieve this end, it utilizes an outcomes-based process. Programmatic outcomes are performance indicators that reflect the extent to which the educational goals of the program are achieved and by which program effectiveness is documented.
Commission on Accreditation for Respiratory Care (CoARC)
State Licensure/Certification Disclosure
The Bachelor of Science in Respiratory Therapy residential degree program is recognized as an accredited program by the Commission on Accreditation for Respiratory Care (COARC). Upon successful completion of the program, students are eligible to sit for the Respiratory Care Credentialing Examination provided by the National Board for Respiratory Care (NBRC). The NBRC exam is recognized by Respiratory Therapy state regulatory agencies as satisfactorily meeting state exam requirements for entry to practice. Consequently, there are no additional educational requirements required for all 50 states.
It is important to note that individual states have the authority to require graduates to pass the NBRC exam and obtain a state license in order to practice as respiratory therapists. Students are strongly encouraged to review their state-specific regulations prior to enrollment for any non-educational requirements for their respective state such as license application qualifications, state fees, and character and fitness standards. For the most up to date information regarding respiratory therapy trainer state regulation for all states, please refer to https://www.nbrc.org/resources/#state-licensing
Prospective students should be aware that each state has different professional licensure and certification requirements governing various occupations. Liberty University works to confirm if its educational programs meet the educational prerequisites for professional licensure or certification outside the Commonwealth of Virginia and updates this information each year. Students who plan to pursue licensure outside the Commonwealth of Virginia should be aware that state licensure requirements are subject to changes. Students are ultimately responsible for verifying their individual eligibility for state licensure and satisfying any requirements imposed thereby. While a program may originally meet the educational requirements for licensure, changes in requirements could impact the program’s ability to meet any new educational requirements. Students are strongly encouraged to check with their state licensure board to confirm licensure requirements and obtain additional guidance as needed from the respective licensure board.
State Licensure/Certification
View the licensure/certification requirements for your state.
Location Change
At any time you may notify us of a location change that could affect your licensure disclosure information. We require that you provide us an official notification by completing the State Change Notification form. Any address changes done through your myLU portal will not be considered an official address change and will not generate an updated disclosure."
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/social-studies/","Residential Bachelor of Education in Social Studies Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Licensure
Share your love for social studies with young learners through a Bachelor of Education in Social Studies Education, Grades 6-12 degree. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses from a social studies-integrated approach. Our education methods classes are designed to give you the tools to meet the needs of every learner. You’ll learn how to utilize the strengths all students bring to the classroom. In-field classroom experiences throughout the program will allow you to put the theory you learn into practice. Classes in economics, history, government, and geography will prepare you to teach these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in social studies education. Liberty faculty will show you how to view teaching through a biblical worldview. You’ll be ready to make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Social Studies Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about social studies and want to help learners develop the same zeal. This degree will allow you to begin a career in Social Studies Education. You’ll have the opportunity to gain state licensure and the qualifications needed to teach students at the middle or high school level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
The Social Studies Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) degree is also available online.
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Social Studies Education Courses
Principles of Microeconomics (ECON 213)
Regional Studies in Geography (GEOG 320)
Constitutional Government and Free Enterprise (GOVT 200)
Historical Methodology (HIST 300)
Comparative Civilization (HIWD 370)
Career Opportunities in Social Studies Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach Social Studies Education in grades 6-12.
Secondary Social Studies School Teacher
K-12 Education Consultant
K-12 Curriculum Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/health-sciences/bachelors/respiratory-therapy-post-licensure/","Advance Your Clinical Career with Our Bachelor of Science in Respiratory Therapy (RRT to BSRT) Online Degree
Do you want to expand your career options and take your respiratory therapy skills to a higher level? If you are a Registered Respiratory Therapist (RRT) and have an associate degree, then our Bachelor of Science in Respiratory Therapy — RRT to BSRT degree can help provide the skills and knowledge you need to open new career opportunities.
With Liberty’s BSRT degree program, you can learn advanced methods in determining your patients’ needs, advanced modes of ventilation, cardiopulmonary interactions in health and illness, and other important skills. These skills can enable you to help you serve your patients as they seek to maximize their recovery times and improve their conditions. Liberty’s online respiratory therapy bachelor’s degree can help you get the training you need.
What is an RRT to BSRT program?
Liberty’s online respiratory therapy degree can take you from your certification as a respiratory therapist to a completed bachelor’s degree. This program is designed to build on your previous training with additional specialized content to give you advanced skills.
With a degree in respiratory therapy, you can take advantage of new opportunities in the respiratory therapy industry such as management and administrative roles, or advanced practice positions. Liberty’s online respiratory therapy program can help you build toward a more rewarding and fulfilling career.
CoARC Accreditation
Liberty University’s B.S. in Respiratory Therapy online program holds Provisional Accreditation from the Commission on Accreditation for Respiratory Care (COARC). See Liberty’s accreditation page for more information.
The CoARC’s outcomes webpage https://coarc.com/students/programmatic-outcomes-data/ 
CoARC accredits respiratory therapy education programs in the United States. To achieve this end, it utilizes an ‘outcomes-based’ process. Programmatic outcomes are performance indicators that reflect the extent to which the educational goals of the program are achieved and by which program effectiveness is documented.
A Bachelor of Science in Respiratory Therapy (RRT to BSRT) from Liberty University can help you gain the values, knowledge, and skills needed to elevate your opportunities for promotion and increase your effectiveness in the field. Gain the confidence and professionalism needed to react calmly and quickly under stress. Our online respiratory therapist bachelor’s degree can help you advance your practice and vie for additional compensation in advanced roles.
Why Choose Our Bachelor of Science in Respiratory Therapy — RRT to BSRT Degree? 
Liberty University’s BSRT can not only help you pursue opportunities for promotion and higher compensation — it can also keep you up-to-date with current practices and trends that may help you meet broader challenges in the field. All of our courses are taught from a Christian worldview and can be completed 100% online. This means you can advance your career from the comfort of your own home or office without compromising your values or neglecting your other responsibilities.
Common Questions
While searching for the best online school for respiratory therapy, you may have questions about how an online degree can help you meet your career goals. Below are some common questions about Liberty’s respiratory therapist online degree.
What degree is needed to be a respiratory therapist?
Respiratory therapy: associate vs bachelor’s degree
What can you do with a Bachelor’s in Respiratory Therapy online degree?
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Occupational Outlook Handbook: Respiratory Therapists (viewed online July 15, 2021). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor of Science in Respiratory Therapy (RRT to BSRT) Online Degree? 
Throughout our online Bachelor of Science in Respiratory Therapy, you can learn the skills and competencies required of a respiratory therapist practicing at the top of their field. This program can help you:
Learn how to evaluate clinical data to determine the appropriateness of prescribed respiratory care.
Keep on top of new therapies and practices.
Engage in professional activities that further the profession of respiratory therapy.
Learn up-to-date research techniques used in respiratory therapy.
Develop management and leadership techniques that can set you apart for a promotion.
You’ll also learn the importance of preserving your patients’ dignity while you ease their suffering, allowing you to give them excellent professional and spiritual care.
This degree is designed to help you confidently:
Differentiate practice idiosyncrasies and determine respiratory therapies leveraging evidence-based approaches associated with advanced practice.
Develop a project or research proposal related to clinical practice, administration, or education associated with respiratory therapy.
Critically appraise and interpret relevant medical and other authoritative literature related to advanced clinical practice, administration, education, and/or research associated with respiratory therapy.
Integrate a biblical worldview within the healthcare environment.
Featured Courses 
RESP 406 – Advanced Respiratory Support
RESP 420 – Cardiopulmonary Physiology and Monitoring
RESP 422 – Current Issues in Respiratory Care
RESP 430 – Fundamentals of Respiratory Care Research
Program Highlights for the Online Respiratory Therapy Bachelor’s Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online RRT to BSRT degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-$2,000 per year on textbooks!
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/social-sciences/","B.S. in Social Sciences
Residential Program in Social Sciences (B.S.)
Bachelor of Science in Social Sciences majors receive a solid base in history studies with additional coursework in geography, government, and economics. Students are equipped with a global perspective, enabling them to understand world societies and cultures.
This degree is offered through the Department of History.
Teach Social Studies with Your B.Ed. Degree
Turn your passion for the social sciences into a fulfilling teaching career. With a Bachelor of Education (B.Ed) degree in Social Studies Education 6-12, you can get the licensure you need to teach in this field.
Learn more about the B.Ed.
Academic Information for the Social Sciences Major
Social Sciences Courses You Could Take
GOVT 200: Constitutional Government and Free Enterprise
HIUS 360: American Economic History
HIST 370: Comparative Civilizations
ECON 213: Principles of Microeconomics
Start Your Career in Social Science
Career Opportunities for Social Sciences Majors
Archaeologist
Market Researcher
Museum Curatorship
Information Consultant
Lawyer
Social Scientist
Teacher"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/social-work/","Serve Your Community with an Online Bachelor’s in Social Work Degree from Liberty University
Do you want to offer hope to individuals, families, and communities — both locally and statewide? If so, you may be interested in becoming a social worker with advanced training from Liberty University.
If you’re not interested in attending class on a residential campus but you’d like to work towards becoming a social worker, degrees online are available. Of those options, Liberty offers one of the most affordable, credible, and respected BSW degrees online. 
Our online Bachelor of Science in Social Work (BSW) degree can help you tackle critical social challenges through an understanding of human psychology. Learn to evaluate, engage with, and intervene for individuals, families, and communities. With the skills you gain from our online bachelor’s degree in social work, you can help the people of your community take a step toward healthier lives.
Our Bachelor of Social Work degree has been accredited by the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE).
Our online BSW degree can help you adapt to hurting communities in a diverse world. Learn from industry professionals with real-world experience in human services and get on-the-job experience in your community through social work field placements. Best of all, you can fit your education into your life with Liberty University’s flexible online learning environment.
Why Choose Liberty University’s Online Social Work Bachelor’s Degree?
With Liberty’s bachelor’s in social work, you can help people in your community or work with communities across the country. Our online social work degree can help provide the skills and experience you need to become a caring, effective social worker. Through this program, you can gain critical knowledge of human psychology — which is valuable in every people-focused industry.
An online BSW degree can benefit you in several career paths. You can sharpen the skills you need for a career as a social worker — preparing for future graduate studies or for other behavioral science roles. With Liberty’s online bachelor’s degree in social work, you can earn a degree through a flexible learning environment that works for you.
As a pioneer in distance education since 1985, Liberty understands what you’re looking for in an online social work degree program. You want a degree that can mold you into a professional capable of serving individuals with excellence, but you don’t want to sacrifice your personal obligations to pursue your degree. 
We seek to exceed your academic expectations by offering a CSWE-accredited Bachelor of Science in Social Work that can help you gain valuable skills and command the respect of hiring managers. Our online BSW is taught by a group of expert professors with years of real-world experience and a vested interest in your success. Our online social work program’s curriculum has been carefully developed using extensive research, the knowledge of social work professionals, and rigorous accreditation requirements. 
Better yet, at Liberty, you won’t have to put your life on hold to earn your bachelor’s in social work degree online. The flexible nature of our online BSW program allows you to complete your assignments when it’s most convenient for you, and our professors are readily available to offer guidance on assignments. Our professors want you to succeed. As a student in our online social work program, you’ll have the expertise and experience of your professors at your full disposal.
What Are the Benefits of Liberty’s Social Work Online Degree?
While many online social work colleges offer their own versions of BSW degrees, we believe Liberty stands out. Here’s why: 
Unlike some online social work programs, Liberty’s online BSW degree is accredited by the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE). Earning your CSWE-accredited online social work degree from Liberty University can help you confidently pursue careers in social work upon graduation.
Improve your employment options by demonstrating your knowledge of strategic human services and relevant experience in the field. This online social worker degree program can help equip you with practical knowledge directly applicable to real-world settings.
Use our online BSW program to lay the groundwork for graduate studies that can prepare you for a career in advanced research or clinical counseling.
This degree’s field placements can be completed at a location near you, so you won’t have to wait until you graduate to start making a difference in your community. 
Job Outlook for Social Workers
Social work is a high-demand career field. Every day, families and children in need of help get the assistance they need from social workers, but an increasing number of people seek care and find none. With Liberty’s BSW program, you can become part of the solution for communities in crisis.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the job outlook for social workers is projected to increase by 12% between 2020 and 2030. Better yet, with a median salary of $51,760 per year, you can pursue a lucrative field by earning a human services bachelor’s degree online.*
Our bachelor’s in social work seeks to prepare students to seize job opportunities and help struggling populations across the country. The online delivery of our bachelor’s in social work also allows you to complete your field experience requirements at a location near you, so you can begin serving your community in a human-services capacity before you finish your degree.
*Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, at Occupational outlook handbook: Social workers (viewed online September 13, 2021). Cited projections may not reflect local and/or short-term economic or job conditions and do not guarantee actual job growth.
Can I complete a social work degree online?
Is a BSW considered a social worker?
What can you do with a Bachelor of Social Work degree online?
Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Social Work allows you to use your understanding of human behavior to help people heal, grow, and thrive. As a professional in the health and human services field, you can use your skills and knowledge to:
Build effective case management systems
Develop support networks
Identify people and communities in need
Research and implement systems to serve client needs
Respond to critical care needs such as abuse or mental health emergencies
While earning your BSW degree online, you can gain abundant knowledge and expertise that are integral to success in the field of social work. But taking social work classes online doesn’t mean that you won’t get hands-on experience. Liberty’s online social work degree blends real-world training and a virtual intensive to help you prepare for the field with confidence.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Bachelor’s Degree in Social Work?
Through Liberty’s online social work classes, you’ll receive specialized training in assessments, intervention strategies, and counseling techniques. These skills can help prepare you to practice as a human services professional in diverse communities. As a social worker, you can be empowered to help families and individuals make positive life changes, no matter their background. Partner with Liberty to gain the knowledge you need for a rewarding career or future graduate study.
Featured Social Work Courses
SOWK 270 – Ethics in Professional Helping
SOWK 300 – Human Behavior and the Social Environment
SOWK 350 – Social Work Practice with Individuals and Families
SOWK 355 – Social Work Practice with Groups
Highlights of Our Online Social Work Bachelor’s Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Learn field-tested techniques for addressing human services issues in your community.
Complete field placements in your area that allow you to learn under practicing agents and gain real-world experience.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/behavioral-sciences/social-work/bachelors-bsw/","B.S. in Social Work
Residential Bachelor of Science in Social Work (BSSW)
Be at the forefront of advocacy for justice, compassion, and care for people who find themselves in need of social, mental, or spiritual help. With a Bachelor of Science in Social Work (BSSW), you can help people, communities, and organizations both domestically and internationally.
Liberty’s Department of Social Work will prepare you to be the hands and feet of Christ in this gratifying and meaningful field.
Program Mission Statement:
The mission of Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Social Work program is to prepare healthy, generalist social workers to be servant leaders who follow the example of Christ and will influence the world by enhancing the lives of all individuals, families, and communities through competent, research-informed knowledge, values, skills, and cognitive and affective processes consistent with the purpose of the profession.
Social workers can be found in a wide range of careers. Your profession could include counseling, ministry, case management, community engagement, and program development. Get equipped for a career that helps people build better lives. See additional career options below!
The B.S. in Social Work is also offered online.
Benefits to Your Social Work (BSSW) Degree
Many social service agencies prefer to hire candidates with a social work degree
A BSSW opens the door to multiple job opportunities
Advanced standing may be available to you (Earn up to one year of academic credit towards a Master of Science in Social Work when you have earned your BSSW from an accredited school)
View Testimonial
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
Accreditation
Liberty’s B.S. in Social Work degree program, offered in both residential and distance education formats, is accredited by the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE). Liberty University is regionally accredited by SACSCOC
Program Evaluation
CSWE Form AS 4 Updated 2.10.2022
Academics: Social Work (BSSW) Degree
Social Work Featured Courses
Social Work Professional Exploration (SOWK 135)
Ethics in Professional Helping (SOWK 270)
Human Behavior & the Social Environment (SOWK 300)
Social Work in Mental Health (SOWK 431)
Social Work Practice with Diverse Populations (SOWK 450)
**The BSSW Program does not give academic credit for life experiences or previous work experience. The program does recognize the value of previous work and life experience. The program encourages students to integrate the knowledge gained in the classroom with their work and life experience.
Start Your Career in Social Work
Find a Career in:
Adoption agencies
Child services
Churches
Community organizations
Court systems
Developmental disability facilities
Employee assistance programs
Foreign missions
Government agencies
Refugee resettlement
Hospices
Hospitals
Mental health clinics
Military bases
Nursing homes
Private practice
Schools
Social service agencies
Human trafficking prevention and intervention"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/social-studies/","Show Students the Value of the Past with an Education Degree in Social Studies
Do you have a passion for history and want to share your love for the past with the next generation? If so, Liberty University’s Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Social Studies Education 6-12 is the degree for you! This program can prepare you with education essentials – like your teaching license – and all the critical knowledge points you’ll need to teach social studies to middle school or high school.
As someone who understands the value of examining the past to inform the future, you probably want to make sure students are able to see that same value. As a social studies teacher, you can inspire all your students to learn from what history has taught us and go on to be successful in their lives – no matter what profession they choose.
What is social studies education?
This discipline is designed to educate future teachers in specific social studies subjects, including history, political science, and psychology. You can learn to educate students on these subjects as you work towards earning your teacher’s license.
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Social Studies Education Degree?
Choosing where to pursue your degree is a major decision. At Liberty, we have resources to help you get where you need to go. Our program can provide you with cutting-edge knowledge and techniques, hands-on experience, and an endorsement for a teaching license approved by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE).
Here are some of the benefits of choosing Liberty University for your education degree:
Practical Learning | You can gain hands-on experience by completing 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching.
Flexibility | Your courses are all offered in a 100% online, 8-week format with the exception of your practicums and student teaching – which can be completed at a school near you.
Integrity | Each of our courses is taught from a Christian perspective, so you can graduate prepared to teach your students ethically and with biblical principles in mind.
What Will You Learn in Our B.Ed. in Social Studies Education Degree?
As a teacher, you must be prepared to properly educate your students and guide them to becoming successful adults. Throughout your Bachelor of Education degree, you will be taught practical subjects and skills like oral and written communication, psychology, mathematics, and Christian ethics. Your B.Ed. can also provide you with all the knowledge and training you’ll need to teach 6-12 grade students in the social studies discipline.
You can learn how to teach in the classroom with courses on educating different learners, instructional design, content measurement and evaluation, curriculum fundamentals, and teaching methods. Then, you will have the opportunity to practice all that you’ve learned in a real classroom full of students!
Additionally, your social studies concentration can specifically prepare you to teach this area of study to your students. Some of the topics you can learn include:
European and U.S. history
Geography
Microeconomics
State and local governments
The Age of Enlightenment
The Civil War, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War
Featured Courses
EDUC 360 – Foundations of Education
GEOG 200 – Introduction to Geography
HIEU 202 – History of Western Civilization II
HIST 300 – Historical Methodology
Highlights of Our B.Ed. Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Graduate with licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia.
Complete 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
Observe and teach in a variety of school settings with your required practicum and student teaching hours.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/law-and-policy/public-policy/","Use Your Degree in Public Policy to Make an Impact on Your Community and Beyond
Imagine having a hand in tomorrow’s policies – policies that impact individuals in your county, state, or country. Public policy affects every vocation in public, private, and nonprofit sectors. If you are interested in entering the field of law and policy, Liberty’s Bachelor of Science in Law and Policy – Public Policy can help you gain the knowledge you’ll need to get started.
Earning a degree in law and public policy can prepare you for positions in city management and planning, legal writing, politics, or even teaching. And with Christian principles integrated into your coursework, you can be confident that you will be trained with excellence and integrity.
If your career goal is to influence law and policy in a profession other than as an attorney, our public policy bachelor’s degree could be right for you. With it, you’ll gain the skills and influence you need to have an impact on the lives and communities around you.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Law and Policy Degree in Public Policy?
Understanding the practice of law is essential to understanding public policy. At Liberty University, our online law and policy degree is designed to help you grow both professionally and personally, so all of your courses will be taught from a biblical worldview.
Our online government classes can equip you with advanced training in the core areas of law to help you think ethically about your decisions and prepare you to make a positive impact on your community and throughout the world.
Integrate a Biblical Worldview
The rule of law is essential to good order in a just society. As a student in this degree program, you can learn to integrate your knowledge of legal principles and practices with your Christian faith. You will also discover how Judeo-Christian values have influenced our legal system and policies.
When you choose Liberty University for your online law and policy degree, you can be confident that your program is preparing you for a rewarding and successful career!
Learn from Legal Professionals
Your courses will be taught by faculty with degrees in law, government, and public policy, as well as years of experience in various political fields.
As a student in this degree program, you can learn from our distinguished faculty’s law and policy expertise so that you can start your career in this field with confidence.
What Will You Learn in Our B.S. in Law and Policy – Public Policy Degree?
Through Liberty’s law and policy bachelor’s degree, you will receive training in logic and legal reasoning, legal research and writing, persuasive communications, and the use of legal information, resources, and tools. You will also learn about public policy advocacy and formulation as well as how to enact and implement public policies.
By working through comparative studies of other legal and governmental systems, this degree will help you gain a better understanding of American jurisprudence and public policy. Additionally, you’ll have opportunities for tailored research, presentation, and publication.
Overall, you can learn how to:
Describe strategies for effective public policy advocacy.
Evaluate the process of formulating and enacting public policy legislation.
Describe the execution of public policy through rule-making, regulation, and compliance enforcement.
Featured Courses
GOVT 215 – Logic and Legal Reasoning
GOVT 220 – American Government
GOVT 461 – National Security Law and Policy
GOVT 463 – Health Care Law and Policy
Highlights of Our Online Law and Policy Program
This program can help you acquire tools and training to prepare for the Law School Admission Test (LSAT).
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
GetEducated.com ranked Liberty’s BS in Law and Policy – Pre-Law in the Top 10 Most Affordable Bachelor’s in Legal Studies.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/mathematics/","Residential Bachelor of Education in Mathematics Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) – Licensure
Feed your passion for both mathematics and teaching with a Bachelor of Education in Mathematics Education, Grades 6-12 degree. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses from a math-integrated approach. Our education methods classes are designed to give you the tools to meet the needs of every learner. You’ll learn how to utilize the strengths all students bring to the classroom. In-field classroom experiences throughout the program will allow you to put the theory you learn into practice. Classes in calculus, statistics, algebra, and geometry will prepare you to teach these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in mathematics education. Liberty faculty will show you how to view teaching through a biblical worldview. You’ll be ready to make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Mathematics Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about math and want to help learners develop the same zeal. This degree will allow you to begin a career in Mathematics Education. You’ll have the opportunity to gain state licensure and the qualifications needed to teach students at the middle or high school level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
The Mathematics Education, Grades 6-12 (B.Ed.) degree is also available online.
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Mathematics Education Courses
Introduction to Programming (CSIS 111)
Calculus and Analytic Geometry I (MATH 131)
Introduction to Discrete Mathematics (MATH 250)
Introduction to Statistical Analysis (MATH 211)
Introduction to the History of Mathematics (MATH 345)
Career Opportunities in Mathematics Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach Mathematics Education in grades 6-12.
Secondary Mathematics School Teacher
K-12 Education Consultant
K-12 Curriculum Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/engineering/bachelors/mechanical-engineering-bsme/","Residential Mechanical Engineering (BSME)
Acquire the skills you’ll need to enter the exciting field of Mechanical Engineering with a Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering (BSME) from Liberty University. Here, you’ll gain a broad foundation in the areas of solid mechanics, thermal-fluids, mechatronics, and materials engineering.
Get theoretical knowledge along with the practical experience that will prepare you for the industry or graduate school. The incorporation of computational modeling and simulation in our curriculum increases your opportunities to find jobs in high-tech companies. Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith. Our faculty share your passion for exploring the complexities of God’s creation in order to support initiatives that will improve quality of life.
Mechanical engineers learn about the motion of matter, forces, and energy in order to design and manufacture mechanical devices and systems. From basic machines like the lever and on to rockets and flying cars, mechanical engineers develop solutions to advance technology.
Specialized equipment and facilities at Liberty University include:
High-Performance Computer (HPC)
Scanning Electron Microscope
Center for Engineering Research and Education
Accreditation
The Mechanical Engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission(s) of ABET, under the General Criteria and the Program Criteria for Mechanical and Similarly Named Engineering Programs.
Featured Mechanical Engineering Courses
Mechatronics (ENGR 313)
Computer-Aided Engineering (ENGM 350)
Design of Machine Components (ENGM 415)
Thermodynamics (PHYS 320)
Career Outlook*
Median Pay: $95,300/year, $45.82/hour
Number of Jobs: 284,900
*2021 stats from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
Career Opportunities in Mechanical Engineering
Robotics/controls engineer
Automotive engineer
Aircraft designer
Manufacturing engineer
Biomedical engineer
Field engineer in the oil industry
Structural analysis engineer
Energy conservation engineer
Where Students Have Interned
Lockheed Martin
BW Integrated Systems
Sikorsky
Framatome
WSP USA
Mac Trucks
Where Alumni Have Worked
Lockheed Martin
BW Integrated Systems
Purdue University graduate program
Virginia Commonwealth University graduate program
Harris Corporation"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/mathematics/","B.S. in Mathematics
Residential Program for the B.S. in Mathematics
Degree Information
A Bachelor of Science in Mathematics from Liberty University can help take you where you want to go in your career.
Whether it is graduate school, pursuing an actuarial career, working for the government, teaching mathematics, or any other sector of the job market, a degree in mathematics can open the door for you.
While needed in many career industries, math majors can also gain the foundation necessary for advanced studies in other fields.
Learn from professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and who share your passion for mathematics.
This degree is offered through the Department of Mathematics.
View Testimonial
<span data-mce-type=""bookmark"" style=""display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;"" class=""mce_SELRES_start""> </span>
Teach Mathematics with Your B.Ed. Degree
Turn your passion for math into a fulfilling teaching career. With a Bachelor of Education (B.Ed) degree in Mathematics Education 6-12, you can get the licensure you need to teach in this field.
Learn more about the B.Ed. 
Academics for the B.S. in Mathematics
Advanced Mathematics Courses You Could Take
Modern Geometry (MATH 305)
Differential Equations (MATH 334)
Elementary Abstract Algebra I(MATH 421)
Real Analysis (MATH 431)
Start Your Career in Mathematics
Career Opportunities with a Mathematics Major
Cryptography
Economist
Operations Research Analyst
Inventory Control Specialist
Budget Analyst
Purchasing Agent
Cost Estimator
Fraud Investigator
Math Teacher
Actuary
Logistician
Financial Analyst
Software Tester
Programmer Analyst
Wide variety of Federal Gov’t Positions"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/mathematics/","Share Your Talents and Lead the Next Generation into a Bright Future 
Pursuing your teaching goals doesn’t mean putting your life on hold. With Liberty, you can earn your bachelor’s degree and teacher’s license all at once – and from the comfort of your own home. Our 100% online Bachelor of Education in Mathematics can help you obtain the credentials you need to teach 6-12 grade math and make a difference in the lives of future students. 
Imagine a career inspiring the next generation of business professionals, engineers, and even educators. Your ability to translate the complexities of math to these young minds will have a lasting impact. The advances we are making in society and technology today are just the beginning – we need more bright minds involved in the discoveries of tomorrow. So partner with Liberty to get the tools you – and your students – will need to be successful. 
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor of Education Program?
Liberty’s unique licensure-track B.Ed. programs provide 100% online, Virginia Department of Education (VDOE) approved courses. With hands-on experience through student teaching and practicums in a classroom near you, you can learn to apply teaching theory to real-world problems. 
With Liberty’s mission to Train Champions for Christ, you can be confident that you’ll study under dedicated professors who teach from a biblical worldview and are passionate about building up teachers who pursue excellence and Christ-like compassion. Our faculty have years of experience in their fields and will help you learn how to seamlessly integrate biblical principles into your profession. 
Designed to provide maximum flexibility and convenience as a fully online program, our bachelor’s degree in math education for 6-12 grade students can give you the foundation you need to thrive as a teacher — without ever having to travel to a university campus. 
What Will You Learn in Our Mathematics Education Degree? 
Liberty’s B.Ed. in Mathematics Education is broken down into 4 major components: education courses, practicum and gate courses, math courses, and student teaching. Your education courses explore the major aspects any teacher has to learn, such as evaluating student learning, creating curriculums, and determining behavioral and individual differences between students. 
In your mathematics courses, you will explore topics ranging from calculus and analytic geometry to programming and discrete mathematics. You can also choose between several of your math courses to better tailor your degree to your teaching goals. 
Lastly, your practicum and student teaching courses provide an opportunity to put your knowledge to the test. You’ll work in the classroom alongside a licensed teacher to see how the principles you’ve learned apply in the real world. 
Featured Courses
CSIS 111 – Introduction to Programming 
MATH 131 – Calculus and Analytical Geometry I 
MATH 321 – Linear Algebra* 
MATH 350 – Discrete Mathematics 
*Course guide coming soon 
Highlights of Our B.Ed. Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field. 
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 6 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Graduate with licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia. 
Complete 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation. 
Observe and teach in a variety of school settings with your required practicum and student teaching hours. 
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/middle-education/","Residential B.Ed. in Middle Education (Grades 6-8) – Licensure
Prepare for the 21st-century classroom with a Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Middle Grades Education degree from Liberty University. Here, we recognize that each child is uniquely designed with specific learning needs. And, we teach you how to meet these needs to support the development of your students.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in middle grades education. You’ll learn how to teach with a biblical worldview and make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Middle Grades Education degree is designed for students who do not have an initial teaching license. The courses address topics such as teaching in specific content areas as well as middle school curriculum and instruction. This will help you to create curriculum and methodology to reach varied learners. The Middle Grades coursework also includes field experiences in specific settings with differing types of students.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
See the online B.Ed. in Middle Education degree
Academics: B.Ed. in Middle Education
Career Information
Graduates with the B.Ed. in Middle Grades Education who gain state licensure will be eligible to teach students in grades 6-8. Our residential Middle Grades programs are content-specific with English, Math, Science, and Social Science cognates. Our graduates pursue a range of positions in the field of Middle Grades education including public, private, Christian, and international settings.
With a B.Ed. and an initial license in Middle Grades Education (content-specific), graduates are able to pursue additional endorsements in administration, allowing them to move into the principalship or take and pass the Virginia Praxis (content-specific) to add additional areas of endorsement to licensure.
Candidates have student taught and completed supervised field experiences in public, private, and Christian school settings across the United States and internationally. It is not uncommon for candidates to be hired right out of student teaching."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/middle-education/","Inspire Future Generations with an Online Bachelor’s Degree in Middle Education
Do you have a passion for giving young people a foundation for their futures? When you pursue Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Middle Education degree, you are giving yourself the opportunity to become a licensed middle school teacher without ever stepping foot on a residential college campus to take courses.
Teaching middle school age children requires a very specific understanding of their developmental stage. Throughout this program, you’ll learn about their development as well as gain core knowledge in the subjects you’ll be teaching and the most effective ways to prepare lesson plans, communicate with, and instruct adolescents. 
By partnering with Liberty University to complete your online education degree, you’ll have the opportunity to gain the necessary skills, experience, knowledge, and credentials needed to successfully teach preteens. With this degree, you’ll walk away with hours of classroom experience and a license to teach in the state of Virginia.*
*Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Bachelor’s Degree in Middle Education?
At Liberty, our mission is Training Champions for Christ. In keeping with that mission, we strive for excellence in all that we do – our academics, our professors, our standards, and more. Here is what you can look forward to by pursuing your online middle education degree with us:
This is one of the first programs in the nation to offer you a curriculum that is 100% online and can prepare you for initial teaching licensure.
Your education professors are invested in your success as a student, dedicated to teaching your courses from a Christian perspective, and equipped with years of real-life experience in the classroom.
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Upon graduation, you can complete licensure requirements approved by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE), allowing you to teach in the state of Virginia or apply for reciprocity for licensure in other states.
Be classroom-ready by completing 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor of Education in Middle Education Online Degree?
The online bachelor’s degree in middle education can prepare you for the classroom with a variety of foundational courses in English, communication, math, history, physics, psychology, biology, history, and more. You’ll be well-prepared to communicate these ideas and topics to your students. Additionally, you’ll study a variety of courses that focus on how to educate children and adolescents. Some of your courses will include topics such as classroom teaching, instructional design for middle school classrooms, how to teach reading, writing, and language to diverse learners, and behavioral and individual differences of students.
In addition to these courses, you’ll complete practicum and student teaching requirements so you can gain experience in a live classroom. Plus, you’ll have the opportunity to specialize in English, math, science, or social science.
Take a look at our featured courses below for more information on what you’ll be studying!
Featured Courses
EDUC 360 – Foundations of Education
EDUC 412 – Middle School Curriculum and Instruction
EDUC 415 – Diagnostic Measurement and Evaluation
English
Math
Science
Social Sciences"
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/middle-education/math/","Residential B.Ed. Degree in Middle Education: Math – Licensure
Meet the unique learning needs of your students with a Bachelor of Education in Middle Education with a cognate in Math. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses from a math-integrated approach.
Classes in Elementary Functions and Coordinate Geometry, Mathematical Reasoning, and Probability and Statistics will prepare you to also teach on these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in Middle Grades Math education. Here, you’ll learn how to view teaching through a biblical worldview and make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Middle Grades Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about specific content and want to help learners develop the same zest. This degree will allow you to begin a career in your content area and equips you with the qualifications needed to teach all students at the Middle Grades (i.e., 6th-8th grade) level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
See the online B.Ed. in Middle Education: Math degree
View the Advising Guide for this program
Academics: Middle Education (B.Ed.): Math
Featured Middle Education Courses
Elementary Functions and Coordinate Geometry (MATH 128)
Introduction to Mathematical Reasoning (MATH 200)
Teaching Elementary and Middle School Math (EDUC 323)
Middle School Curriculum and Instruction (EDUC 412)
Career Opportunities in Middle Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach students in grades 6-8. With a B.Ed. in Middle Education degree, you will also be able to pursue additional endorsements for a career in administration or other areas."
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/middle-education/english/","Residential Degree in Middle Education: English – Licensure
Develop the skills to meet the unique learning needs of your students with a Bachelor of Education in Middle Education with a cognate in English. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses from an English-integrated approach. Classes in world literature, expository writing, and modern grammar will prepare you to also teach on these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators equipped with years of experience in Middle Grades English education. Here, you’ll learn how to view teaching through a Biblical worldview and make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Middle Grades Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about specific content and want to help learners develop the same zest. This degree will allow you to begin a career in your content area and equips you with the qualifications needed to teach all students at the Middle Grades (i.e., 6-8) level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
See the online B.Ed. in Middle Education: English degree
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Middle Education Courses
World Literature I (ENGL 221)
Modern Grammar (ENG 333)
Teaching Writing and Language Arts to Diverse Learners (EDUC 319)
Middle School Curriculum and Instruction (EDUC 412)
Career Opportunities in Middle Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach students in grades 6-8. With a B.Ed. in Middle Education degree, you will also be able to pursue additional endorsements for a career in administration or other areas."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/middle-education/math/","Get Your Teaching License in Middle School Math with a 100% Online Bachelor’s Degree
Have you considered becoming a math teacher but the idea of taking residential college courses seems impossible? With Liberty’s online Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Middle Education, you can complete your bachelor’s degree and become licensed without ever traveling to our physical campus!
Our math-focused B.Ed. program provides the specific coursework and state requirements you need to confidently teach math to middle school students. And even though our program is online, you won’t be missing out on hands-on, classroom experience. Your online courses integrate practicum and student teaching hours that you can complete at a school near you.
Get the training you need without uprooting your life. Your online bachelor’s degree in middle school math is the chance you’ve been looking for to pursue your dreams of teaching. 
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s B.Ed. in Middle Education – Math Degree?
Earning your online Bachelor of Education from Liberty provides you with the flexibility you want mixed with the standard of academic excellence you need. Our B.Ed. is one of the first programs in the nation that is 100% online and can prepare you for initial teaching licensure.
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). Additionally, Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). Because of this, your degree will be well-recognized and well-respected among other schools and employers.
Additionally, this program provides you with licensure endorsement approved by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE), allowing you to teach in the state of Virginia immediately upon graduation.* This degree can prepare you with all the tools and education you’ll need to be successful in the classroom.
*If you are planning to teach in a state other than Virginia, please check the licensure requirements for your state.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Math-Focused Middle Education Degree?
The bachelor’s degree in middle education can prepare you with a variety of foundational courses in English, communication, math, history, physics, psychology, biology, history, and more. You’ll be well-prepared to communicate these ideas and topics to your students.
Additionally, you’ll study a variety of courses that focus on educating children and adolescents. Some of your courses will include topics like classroom teaching, instructional design for middle school classrooms, behavioral and individual differences of students, and how to teach reading, writing, and language to diverse learners. Plus, you’ll complete a total of 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
With your concentration in math, you’ll complete courses on the following subjects so you can be better prepared to teach math to middle school students: functions and coordinate geometry, mathematical reasoning, and probability and statistics.
Featured Courses
EDUC 201 – Introduction to Education and Classroom Technology
EDUC 318 – Teaching Reading to Diverse Learners
EDUC 350 – Behavioral and Individual Differences
EDUC 360 – Foundations of Education
Highlights of Our B.Ed. in Middle Education – Math Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online Bachelor of Education from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Graduate with licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia.
Complete 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
Observe and teach in a variety of school settings with your required practicum and student teaching hours.
Learn from professors who are professionals in the field of education and are dedicated to our mission of Training Champions for Christ."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/middle-education/english/","Inspire Middle School Students with an Online Middle Education Degree Focused on English
Learning how to communicate effectively is one of the most important skills you can teach. If you want to help middle school students develop strong English and communication skills, Liberty’s 100% online B.Ed. in Middle Education — English degree can equip you with the skills you need.
Teaching 6-8 graders is an opportunity to influence students during one of the most transitional periods of their lives. The positive influence you can have throughout this time is long-lasting and can lay a firm foundation for their future success, academically and personally.
Understanding English grammar and rhetoric contributes to student success, both academically and in regard to future career success. Your degree in middle education can help your students gain confidence in their English skills and abilities — confidence that will help them in many areas of their lives.
Why Choose Liberty’s B.Ed. in Middle Education – English Degree?
Earning your online Bachelor of Education from Liberty combines the flexibility you want with the standard of excellence you need. Our B.Ed. is one of the first 100% online bachelor’s programs in the nation — and the only program in Virginia — to offer a curriculum that prepares you for initial teacher licensure.
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). Additionally, Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). Because of this, your degree will be recognized and respected among other schools and employers.
Additionally, this program provides you with licensure endorsement approved by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE), allowing you to teach in the state of Virginia immediately upon graduation*. This degree can prepare you with the tools and knowledge you’ll need to be successful in the classroom.
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
What Will You Learn in Our Online English-Focused Middle Education Degree?
The bachelor’s degree in middle education can provide you with a variety of foundational courses in English, communication, math, history, physics, psychology, biology, history, and more. You’ll be well-prepared to communicate these ideas and topics to your students.
Additionally, you’ll study a variety of subjects that focus on how to educate children and adolescents. Some of your courses will include topics like classroom teaching, instructional design for middle school classrooms, how to teach reading, writing, and language to diverse learners, and behavioral and individual differences between students. Plus, you’ll complete a total of 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
With your concentration in English, you’ll learn about world literature, expository writing, and modern grammar. These courses can give you the knowledge you’ll need to pass on core English language skills and concepts to your middle school students.
Featured Courses
EDUC 201 – Introduction to Education and Classroom Technology
EDUC 318 – Teaching Reading to Diverse Learners
EDUC 350 – Behavioral and Individual Differences
EDUC 360 – Foundations of Education
Highlights of Our B.Ed. in Middle Education – English Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Graduate with licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia.
Complete 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
Observe and teach in a variety of school settings with your required practicum and student teaching hours.
Learn from professors who are professionals in the field of education and are dedicated to our mission of Training Champions for Christ.
Pursuing our online Bachelor of Education licensure-tracks may make you eligible for the Federal TEACH Grant."
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/middle-education/science/","Residential B.Ed. Degree in Middle Education: Science – Licensure
Learn how to meet the unique learning needs of your students with a Bachelor of Education in Middle Education with a cognate in Science. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses from a science-integrated approach. Classes in Chemistry, Environmental Science, and Astronomy will prepare you also to teach these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in Middle Grades Science education. Here, you’ll learn how to view teaching through a biblical worldview and make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Middle Grades Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about specific content and want to help learners develop the same zest. This degree will allow you to begin a career in your content area and equips you with the qualifications needed to teach all students at the Middle Grades (i.e., 6th-8th grade) level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
See the online B.Ed. in Middle Education: Science degree
Featured Courses
Elements of General Chemistry (CHEM 105)
Environmental Science (NASC 315)
Teaching Elementary and Middle School Science (EDUC 324)
Middle School Curriculum and Instruction (EDUC 412)
Career Opportunities in Middle Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach students in grades 6-8. With a B.Ed. in Middle Education degree, you will also be able to pursue additional endorsements for a career in administration or other areas."
"https://www.liberty.edu/education/bachelors/bed/middle-education/social-sciences/","Residential B.Ed. Degree in Middle Education: Social Sciences – Licensure
Position yourself to meet the unique learning needs of your students with a Bachelor of Education in Middle Education with a cognate in Social Science. In Liberty University’s School of Education, you’ll learn to instruct and develop courses from a social science-integrated approach. Classes in Economics, American History, and Comparative Civilization will prepare you to also teach these subjects.
Our courses are taught from a Christian perspective by educators with years of experience in Middle Grades social science education. Here, you’ll learn how to view teaching through a biblical worldview and make a positive impact in public, private, community, or homeschool settings.
The B.Ed. in Middle Grades Education is the perfect degree for individuals who are passionate about specific content and want to help learners develop the same zest. This degree will give you the opportunity to begin a career in your content area and equips you with the qualifications needed to teach all students at the Middle Grades (i.e., 6th-8th grade) level.
Get more info on the B.Ed. degrees at Liberty University
View licensure information
See the online B.Ed. in Middle Education: Social Sciences degree
View the Advising Guide for this program
Featured Middle Education Courses
Survey of Economics (ECON 110)
Survey of American History II (HIUS 222)
Teaching Elementary and Middle School Social Sciences (EDUC 322)
Middle School Curriculum and Instruction (EDUC 412)
Career Opportunities in Middle Education
Upon graduation, you will have the opportunity to gain state licensure and become certified to teach students in grades 6-8. With a B.Ed. in Middle Education degree, you will also be able to pursue additional endorsements for a career in administration or other areas."
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/middle-education/social-sciences/","Become a Licensed Middle School Teacher with Liberty’s B.Ed. in Middle Education – Social Sciences
Does the idea of being a positive role model and helping middle school students reach their full potential excite you? Through Liberty University’s Bachelor of Education in Middle Education – Social Sciences, you can become a licensed middle school teacher in the state of Virginia. This program will help you gain the knowledge and practical skills you’ll need to provide students with a firm foundation that will follow them throughout their lives.
Liberty’s Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Middle Education – Social Sciences can give you in-depth study in teaching methods for economics, American history, world history, and other social issues topics. You’ll also learn how to assess and address students’ diverse learning styles as well as how to create an engaging and effective learning environment. 
In this program, you can sharpen your skills by completing 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching within a real classroom setting. You’ll study under faculty who have years of experience in the classroom and are dedicated to helping you throughout your degree as you pursue licensure. 
The time children spend in middle school shapes the rest of their education and can influence their careers. Become a positive influence and guide your students both academically and spiritually.
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor of Education in Middle Education – Social Sciences?
Liberty’s B.Ed. in Middle Education – Social Sciences is 100% online so you can complete your studies from the comfort of your home. You will be provided with training in best teaching practices, critical learning theories, and cutting-edge teaching technology by professionals with real-world classroom experience. Since true work experience is one of the best ways to gain confidence as a teacher, that valuable learning time is incorporated into your degree. Your practicum and student teaching requirements will ensure that you graduate with experience in a live classroom.
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). This means you can rest assured that your online teaching degree will be well-respected in the industry.
As one of the largest providers of teachers in the state of Virginia, Liberty wants to prepare the next generation of teachers with integrity and strong Christian values. Make a positive and lasting impact on the lives of children from a variety of backgrounds when you partner with us for your degree.
What Will You Learn in Liberty’s Bachelor of Education in Middle Education – Social Sciences Online Degree?
In Liberty’s online B.Ed. in Middle Education, your core teaching courses can give you foundational knowledge in history, English, math, and science. The social sciences cognate will add courses in American history, economics, and the interaction of the West with selected world civilizations. You will also learn important psychology principles you can use to assess your students, benchmarking progress and assisting them in their academic development.
Additionally, you can complete practicum and student teaching hours to prepare you for real classroom teaching and can graduate classroom-ready with 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching.
Featured Courses
EDUC 225 – Instructional Design for Elementary and Middle Classrooms
EDUC 322 – Teaching Elementary and Middle School Social Science
HIUS 222 – Survey of American History II
HIWD 370 – Comparative Civilization
Highlights of Our B.Ed. in Middle Education Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
This is one of the first online bachelor’s programs in the nation to allow you to gain licensure without required on-campus intensive courses.
By completing this program, you can gain licensure in accordance with the Virginia Department of Education guidelines.
You will develop age-appropriate classroom management skills and an understanding of middle education research to ensure that you are up-to-date on the latest best practices and research.
You will complete 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
Pursuing our online Bachelor of Education licensure-tracks may make you eligible for the Federal TEACH Grant.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/middle-education/science/","Prepare Young Minds with Foundational Science Concepts by Earning a Bachelor’s in Education
Are you excited about science and sharing new ideas with others? If you are interested in taking your passion for science into the classroom and using it to educate others, becoming a licensed teacher may be the right career choice for you. Liberty University’s Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Middle Education – Science degree can prepare you with the knowledge, experience, and licensure you’ll need to become a middle school science teacher.
Training young minds for the future is a challenging yet rewarding job. We understand the importance of being an educator and influencer for the next generation of difference-makers. That’s why we have designed our B.Ed. to provide you with all the tools you will need to become a successful educator. Our courses contain cutting-edge knowledge and experiential training all rooted in a biblical worldview – allowing you to graduate as a well-prepared professional.
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor of Education in Middle School Science?
At Liberty, our mission is Training Champions for Christ. In keeping with that mission, we strive for excellence in all that we do – our academics, our professors, our standards, and more. Here is what you can look forward to by pursuing your online middle education degree with us:
This is one of the first programs in the nation to offer you a curriculum that is both 100% online and can prepare you for initial teaching licensure.
Your education professors are invested in your success as a student, dedicated to teaching your courses from a Christian perspective, and equipped with years of real-life experience in the classroom.
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Upon graduation, you can complete licensure requirements approved by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE), allowing you to teach in the state of Virginia or apply for reciprocity for licensure in other states.
Be classroom-ready with 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching.
What Will You Learn in Our B.Ed. in Middle Education – Science Degree?
Throughout your B.Ed. program, you will be learning professional development to help you succeed in any field as well as specifics on scientific concepts and teaching adolescents. Our program prepares you with subjects like communication, mathematics, and biblical principles that can be used in your professional and personal life.
You’ll also learn how to teach students, which will include practical experience in your student teaching hours. Some of the education concepts you’ll study include:
Behavioral and individual differences in students
Classroom teaching
How to teach literature to children and adolescents
Middle school curriculum and instruction
Additionally, your science cognate will expand on your scientific knowledge allowing you to specialize in this coursework as a middle school science teacher. You’ll take courses on chemistry, environmental science, biology, earth science, physics, and more.
Featured Courses
EDUC 319 – Teaching Writing and Language Arts to Diverse Learners
EDUC 360 – Foundations of Education
EDUC 412 – Middle School Curriculum and Instruction
PHSC 121 – Introduction to Astronomy
Highlights of Our B.Ed. in Middle Education – Science Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Graduate with licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia and other states through reciprocity.*
Complete 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
Observe and teach in a variety of school settings with your required practicum and student teaching hours.
Learn from professors who are professionals in the field of education and are dedicated to our mission of Training Champions for Christ.
Complete your B.Ed. in Middle Education – Science in less than 4 years!
Pursuing our online licensure-track Bachelor of Education may make you eligible for the Federal TEACH Grant.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/military-studies/","BS in Military Studies
Residential Military Studies Degree
Prepare for your future career with a B.S. in Military Studies from Liberty University. Develop your understanding of the different aspects of military history, culture, service, and careers. Learn about regional warfare, military intelligence, analysis, and study the history behind current military threats. Gain hands-on leadership experience in recruitment, contracting, and planning.
Learn from professors who are experts in military history and are grounded in their biblical worldview. Leave this program with leadership skills that will allow you to serve effectively and help you advance your career.
The Military Studies (B.S.) degree is also offered online.
This degree is offered through the Department of History.
Academic Information for the B.S. in Military Studies
Military Studies Courses You Could Take
Modern Military Geography (GEOG 380)
Modern American Military History (HIUS 380)
East Asian Warfare (HIWD 375)
Methods of Military Analysis (MISC 300)
Military Leaders and Leadership (MISC 350)
Admission Requirements
View Liberty’s undergraduate admissions requirements
Start Your Career in Military Studies
Career Opportunities for the B.S. in Military Studies
Military Analyst
Intelligence Analyst
Defense Contractor
Security Contractor
Department of Defense Roles
Educational Support Roles"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/military-studies/history/","Influence the Future by Learning the Past with a Degree in Military History
Are you fascinated with military history? Would you like to turn that interest into a career as a contractor, military officer, or other defense-related position? Whether you’re a civilian, a service member, or a veteran, Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Military Studies – History can prepare you for a rich and rewarding career in military history. This military studies program focuses on key events and topics in American and European history that can provide you with a critical context for making good decisions in the midst of military operations. 
There are few civilian academic programs in the country that provide an awareness of military values and culture. Even fewer programs adequately train military personnel and contractors to handle large-scale strategic and professional operations. Liberty’s program does both.
Enter the military community or enhance your current military career with this military studies degree program. Liberty offers four specializations in military studies, and the history track will provide you with a deeper understanding of military operations and strategy while emphasizing the role of American entrepreneurship. This knowledge can increase your skill as a military leader or as a contractor working to support the military.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Military Studies – History Degree?
Liberty University’s Department of History has more military history specialists than any other institution of higher education in the United States, aside from service academies and the American Military University. If you are looking for a degree that offers a firm foundation in military history and can prepare you for future full-time or contracting work with the Department of Defense, other military agencies, or supporting companies, this degree is a great option for you. 
You’ll gain access to our award-winning online instructors and accomplished military veterans from the comfort of your own home. This 100% online military studies degree will train you for a variety of military settings with a strong emphasis on Christian morals and ethics. Furthermore, the history specialization can complement your own experience and help you gain a firm grasp of military operations and events, both past and present.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Military Studies – History Degree?
Gain the knowledge and skills you need to support and defend the United States — both at home and abroad. At Liberty, you can train to become a leader of integrity while you develop a strong Christian foundation and appreciation for our country’s Judeo-Christian heritage. Liberty University’s military studies degree explores military history as well as the deep and ancient cultural contexts for existing military policy and the threats faced in our world today.
By studying military history and the lessons learned on the battlefield, you can develop a strong sense of how to delegate and lead military and military-related operations. The history specialization focuses on key topics in American and European history as well as provides content that is related to military contractors and the larger macroeconomic implications of warfare.
Through Liberty’s military studies degree, you can also develop in-depth knowledge of military doctrine and culture. Your courses will be designed and taught by professors who have relevant military experience and can relate the fundamental knowledge needed to work as a military contractor or Department of Defense worker.
Featured Courses
HIUS 360 – History of American Entrepreneurship
MISC 300 – Methods of Military Analysis
MISC 350 – Military Leaders and Leadership
MISC 490 – Research in Military Doctrine
Highlights of Our B.S. in Military Studies – History Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
We have more military history specialists in our Department of History than any other civilian institution of higher education.
Take courses about military history that were designed by military professionals and veterans who share your love of history and military-related subjects.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/arts-sciences/bachelors/military-studies/leadership/","Residential Bachelor’s in Military Studies – Leadership 
This degree equips both military and civilian students with the tools necessary to serve the U.S. and other nations that align with principles of religious liberty and democracy. With a B.S. in Military Studies: Leadership cognate from Liberty University, you’ll examine military history and beyond with studies in government, intelligence, cultural awareness, and military institutions.
Study the historical patterns and institutional development of military applications while getting a biblical world-view of military force, including the exploration of Just War Theory. Learn from professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and who have advanced academic training in this field. The B.S. in Military Studies offers a combination of history, theology, government, and concentrated military studies courses.
Other B.S. in Military Studies cognates are available online.
This degree is offered through the Department of History.
Academic Information for the BS in Military Studies – Leadership Cognate
Military Leadership Courses You Could Take
Korean and Vietnam Wars (HIWD 375)
Middle Eastern Warfare (HIWD 376)
Modern American Military History (HIUS 380)
Military Intelligence (GOVT 483)
Start Your Career in Military Studies
Career Opportunities for B.S. in Military Studies – Leadership Graduates
Soldier
Military Service Leader
Legislator
Government Diplomat
Intelligence Officer
Military Analyst
Military Strategist
Military Museum Curator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/military-studies/international-security/","Study International Security – Because Knowing is Half the Battle
Whether you want to take your military experience further or start a career in national defense, Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Military Studies – International Security can guide you toward a rewarding career in intelligence. This research-based military studies specialization will provide you with historical context for the threats we face today.
This online international security degree program will guide you through essential areas of military analysis and military doctrine. With courses designed by experienced military intelligence professionals, this degree can equip you for a variety of careers in the defense intelligence industry.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Military Studies – International Security Degree?
Liberty University’s Department of History has more military history specialists than nearly any other institution of higher education in the United States, except for the service academies and American Military University. If you are looking for a firm foundation in military doctrine and intelligence, Liberty’s B.S. in Military Studies incorporates relevant security studies so that you are well prepared for future work in defense intelligence or other related agencies. 
This military studies – international security degree offers extensive knowledge of military operations and can prepare you to be a leader in the intelligence industry. Because your coursework is 100% online, you’ll gain access to our award-winning online instructors and accomplished military veterans from the comfort of your own home or office.
Liberty University – A Top Military-Friendly School
At Liberty University, it’s our privilege to serve those in the military community — whether service members, veterans, or military families. Through benefits for military students and degree programs — like this one — that train professionals to serve the military community well, Liberty’s commitment to our nation’s Armed Forces shines. 
And others have noticed.
Liberty University was recognized for its standout academic programs and military-supportive culture by Military Times, earning the No. 1 rank on the list of Best Online & Nontraditional Schools of 2019.
Liberty University is Virginia’s first Purple Heart University!
A recent Military Times ranking shows Liberty as the seventh-ranked overall tuition assistance (TA) usage for military members. Further, Liberty is the second-highest ranked for TA usage among private universities.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Military Studies – International Security Degree?
Liberty’s military studies degree can give you the knowledge and skills you need to support those who defend the United States — both at home and abroad. You can train to become a leader of integrity while you develop a strong Christian foundation and appreciation for our country’s Judeo-Christian heritage. Liberty University’s military studies degree explores military history as well as the deep and ancient cultural contexts for existing military policy and the threats faced in our world today. This foundation in military history and doctrine will help you understand the connections between past events and current threats.
By obtaining a bachelor’s in military studies – international security degree, you will gain an understanding of the critical needs in today’s intelligence analysis profession. Through extensive research, you will be equipped to tackle the challenge of complex cultural and religious traditions in light of current military doctrine.
This program will also provide an in-depth study of some of the great American and British leaders in military history. Through this study, you can learn how to implement the lessons learned from these leaders to enhance your military or civilian career.
Featured Courses
HIUS 380 – Modern American Military History
MISC 300 – Methods of Military Analysis
MISC 350 – Military Leaders and Leadership
MISC 490 – Research in Military Doctrine
Highlights of Our B.S. in Military Studies – International Security Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-$2,000 per year on textbooks!
We have more military history specialists than any other civilian institution of higher education.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/military-studies/","Duty, Honor, Country Means Something at Liberty University
You want to serve your country, or you have served and want a degree that will reinforce the skills you’ve gained while serving the nation. There are few, if any, civilian academic programs in the country that provide an awareness of military values and culture. Even fewer programs adequately train military personnel and contractors to handle large-scale strategic and professional operations. Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Military Studies can fill this need with a strong focus on military history and 4 different specializations that are tailored to your particular career goals and background.
If you want to turn your commitment to the military into a fulfilling career, then this military studies degree program can help guide you to the proper career path. The knowledge and skills you learn could help you find a job in intelligence, military operations, or military contracting.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Military Studies Degree?
Liberty University’s Department of History has more military history specialists than any other institution of higher education in the United States, aside from the service academies and American Military University. If you are looking for a degree that offers a firm foundation in military history and can help prepare you for future contracting work with the Department of Defense, other military agencies, and supporting companies, then Liberty is a great choice for you.
Our award-winning online instructors and accomplished military veterans will share their expertise in military operations from a Christian worldview. Once you’ve got a firm foundation, you can choose from 4 different specializations to suit your particular goals and background.
History
This program focuses on topics in American and European history, providing important historical context for military operations and events. You will also study the History of American Entrepreneurship, which provides content related to military contractors and larger macroeconomic implications of warfare.
International Security
This research-based program covers historical contexts of current military threats and guides students through pertinent areas of military analysis and military doctrine. This specialization includes coursework on military intelligence and is designed specifically for those seeking careers in defense intelligence.
Professional
This program is geared toward veterans and current service members who want to make the most of their military experience. You can even earn college credit for life experience through our portfolio process to get up to 9 credit hours of course credit if you meet the requirements.
Resiliency
This program trains graduates to support existing and veteran military personnel with transitioning to civilian life, coping with medical complications, and growing in their spiritual development.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Military Studies Degree?
You can gain the knowledge and skills needed to support the defense of the United States — at home and abroad — as well as develop a strong Christian foundation for leadership and appreciation for this country’s Judeo-Christian heritage. Liberty University’s military studies degree is supported primarily by coursework on military history and cultural studies to provide context for existing military policy and threats.
Depending on which specialization you choose, your focus might be on history, intelligence, or helping servicemembers and veterans transition to civilian life. Using historical precepts, you will also explore areas like leadership and entrepreneurship and how they relate to military contracting. With a degree in military studies from Liberty, you can understand the different branches and how they relate to each other in times of peace and war.
Featured Courses
HIWD 375 – Korean and Vietnam Wars
HIWD 376 – Middle Eastern Warfare
MISC 300 – Methods of Military Analysis
MISC 350 – Military Leaders and Leadership
History
International Security
Professional
Resiliency
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/military-studies/professional/","Make the Most of Your Military Service at Liberty University
Turn your military experience into a fulfilling career — or enhance your current military career — with Liberty’s military studies degree program. If you have served in the armed forces and want a degree that will reinforce the skills you gained serving our nation, then Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Military Studies – Professional will more than meet your needs. 
Civilian academic programs that provide an awareness of military values and culture are rare. Rarer still are programs that adequately train military personnel and contractors to effectively handle large-scale strategic and professional operations. Liberty’s program does both. 
Liberty offers 4 specializations in military studies, and if you’re serving or have served your country, the professional track is specifically designed to help you maximize the knowledge and skills you gained in the service. Your military training may even help you finish your degree faster — college credit is granted for some experience.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Military Studies Degree?
Liberty University’s Department of History has more military history specialists than any other institution of higher education in the United States, aside from service academies and the American Military University. If you are looking for a degree that offers a firm grounding in military history and also prepares you for future contracting work with the Department of Defense, other military agencies, and supporting companies, then Liberty’s military studies degree is a great choice. You’ll also find that the professional specialization complements your military service nicely.
Our online instructors and accomplished military veterans will train you for military settings with a strong emphasis on Christian morals and ethics. And with our 100% online format, you can receive this training from the comfort of your home or office! 
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Military Studies Degree?
Liberty’s military studies degree can give you the knowledge and skills you need to support and defend the United States — both at home and abroad. Train to become a leader of integrity while you develop a strong Christian foundation and appreciation for our country’s Judeo-Christian heritage. Liberty University’s military studies degree explores military history as well as the deep and ancient cultural contexts for existing military policy and the threats faced in our world today.
Through this professional military studies program, you’ll learn how to lead others in a variety of military-related operations by studying military history and lessons learned on the battlefield. You’ll also develop an in-depth understanding of military doctrine and culture. Your courses are taught by professors with relevant military experience and the fundamental knowledge you’ll need for a fulfilling career as a military contractor or Department of Defense employee.
Featured Courses
MISC 300 – Methods of Military Analysis
MISC 350 – Military Leaders and Leadership
MISC 491 – Senior Capstone
Highlights of Our B.S. in Military Studies Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
We have more military history specialists in our Department of History than any other civilian institution of higher education.
Transfer in your military training and take advantage of our Experience Plus portfolio process to finish your degree faster.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/","Residential Music & Worship Studies Programs
Do you sense God’s call upon your life to lead worship? Today’s local churches need music ministers and worship leaders to take charge of a multi-faceted, changing ministry. These ministries no longer require personnel exclusively equipped as musicians. They require professionals who have broad experience in worship teaching, worship training, team management and discipleship, worship evangelism, principles of marketing, technology, drama, and music.
Our Bachelor of Science in Music & Worship Studies offers core music courses to develop musical skills, while also providing six core worship courses in order to prepare you to be a biblically grounded worship leader. The program of study also includes internships and a multitude of performance opportunities; all designed to foster collaboration and creativity.
This degree is taught from a Christian worldview by experienced professors committed to sound evangelical theology. This sets Liberty University’s Commercial Music curriculum apart and brings a significant influence on the commercial music industry as a whole.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
Academics: Music & Worship (B.S.)
Featured Music & Worship Courses
Creative Worship (MUSC 201)
Worship Platform Techniques (MUSC 268)
Commercial Music Techniques for Worship (MUSC 302)
Leadership, Philosophy, Music and Organization (MUSC 323)
Congregational Contextualization and Leadership (MUSC 423)
B.S. Music & Worship Studies Cognates & Concentrations
Biblical Studies
Emphasis on scriptural context and study so you can better incorporate biblical principles into your worship
Business
Incorporate business practices like marketing, accounting, and communications into your degree
Pastoral Leadership
Learn how to lead in the church at the pastoral level, including staff management and family ministry
Youth Ministries
Expand your knowledge and develop strategies for youth outreach as a part of your career in music and worship
Career Opportunities for Worship Leadership Graduates
Associate Director of Worship Programming
Minister of Music
Worship Pastor
Worship Leader
Director of Worship and Drama
Director of Worship for Conferences
Music and Worship Evangelist
Support Staff (in large church worship ministry)
Director of Worship Arts
Director of Worship Technology
Contemporary Christian Artist
Worship and Missions Director"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/military-studies/resiliency/","Positively Impact the Lives of Our Nation’s Military Members with Liberty’s B.S. in Military Studies – Resiliency
Military service members give up a lot to serve their country. Often putting their personal and professional lives on hold, they serve with determination and discipline. Their families also endure the stresses of long deployments, sudden moves, and other sacrifices. Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Military Studies – Resiliency can prepare you to help our nation’s heroes and their families deal with the physical, mental, and spiritual burdens of military service.
This military resilience degree program will give you an understanding of the cycle of resilience and how to help our nation’s finest men and women and their families both deal with trauma – and be stronger for it. These concepts can also be applied to other areas of life, giving you a firm foundation for helping any individual who may be affected by economic disasters, armed conflicts, or natural disasters.
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s in Military Studies – Resiliency Degree?
Liberty University’s Department of History has more military history specialists than nearly any other institution of higher education in the United States, except for the service academies and American Military University. Our extensive military resiliency program is not only staffed by accomplished military professionals, but it also will help you network with experts in military resilience across the country. 
Our 100% online course format gives you access to classes, coursework, and our award-winning online instructors from the comfort of your own home. Like all of Liberty’s degree programs, this online military studies degree is taught from a Christian worldview. Our program in military resiliency can prepare you to not only care for service members’ physical and mental wounds but also to ease their spiritual burdens. All of these assets make Liberty a top-tier choice for military resilience training.
Liberty University – A Top Military-Friendly School
At Liberty University, it’s our privilege to serve those in the military community — whether service members, veterans, or military families. Through benefits for military students and degree programs — like this one — that train professionals to serve the military community well, Liberty’s commitment to our nation’s Armed Forces shines. 
And others have noticed.
Liberty University was recognized for its standout academic programs and military-supportive culture by Military Times, earning the No. 1 rank on the list of Best Online & Nontraditional Schools of 2019.
Liberty University is Virginia’s first Purple Heart University!
A recent Army Times ranking shows Liberty as the seventh-ranked overall tuition assistance (TA) usage for military members. Further, Liberty is the second-highest ranked for TA usage among private universities.
What Will You Learn in Our Bachelor’s in Military Studies – Resiliency Degree?
Liberty’s military resilience program can give you the knowledge and skills you need to support those who defend the United States — both at home and abroad. Through it, you can train to become a leader of integrity while you develop a strong Christian foundation and appreciation for our country’s Judeo-Christian heritage. Liberty University’s military studies degree explores military history as well as the deep and ancient cultural contexts for existing military policy and the threats faced in our world today.
By studying military resiliency, you will gain insight into the Resilience Life Cycle and the different phases of personal resilience. You will be equipped to support existing and veteran military personnel with transitioning to civilian life, coping with medical complications, and growing in their spiritual development.
You will also develop an in-depth knowledge of military doctrine and culture. With this end in mind, your courses are taught by professors who have extensive military experience and are leaders in the military resilience field.
Featured Courses
HIUS 360 – History of American Entrepreneurship
HIUS 380 – Introduction to Military Studies
MISC 350 – Military Leaders and Leadership*
MILT 275 – The Resilient Warrior
*Course guide coming soon!
Highlights of Our B.S. in Military Studies – Resiliency Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-$2,000 per year on textbooks!
We have more military history specialists than any other civilian institution of higher education.
As an online student, you will have the opportunity to network with leaders and experts in military resilience from all across the country.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/biblical-studies/","Residential Music & Worship – Biblical Studies Program
Prepare for a career in worship ministry with a Music & Worship (B.S.) – Biblical Studies degree from Liberty University. Develop a solid foundation in worship-oriented musicianship and biblical knowledge that will help you represent Christ through your work. Through individual lessons, worship team ministry coaching, and focused class times, you’ll learn music and worship ministry techniques in:
Worship leadership
Service crafting
Biblical studies on the philosophy of worship
Rehearsing
Team development
Worship music-oriented musicianship
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Professors in this degree program hold advanced and terminal degrees in music, as well as decades of real-world experience in worship ministry.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
The degree requires a local practicum and an extensive internship experience within worship ministry.
You will need to pass the Sophomore Review in order to be accepted into the program’s upper-level training.
Featured Biblical Studies Courses
Acts (BIBL 364)
Old and New Testament Music and Worship (MUSC 202)
Commercial Music Techniques for Worship (MUSC 302)
Senior Artist or Worship Program (MUSC 496)
Internship (MUSC 499)
Career Opportunities: Music & Worship – Biblical Studies Graduates
Worship Leader
Worship Music Director
Worship Songwriter-Arranger
Church Planter with Worship Emphasis
Campus Worship Director for Churches
Associate Minister
Church Musician"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/music-and-worship/business/","Residential Music & Worship – Business Program
Enhance your future career options with a Music & Worship (B.S.) – Business degree from Liberty University. Get training in worship-oriented musicianship and worship arts as you study topics like harmonic practices, creative worship, music theory, and conducting. Gain insight into the business world through specialized courses such as business law, financial accounting, and principles in management.
Study under experienced professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and integrate a biblical worldview into the classroom. Professors in this degree program hold advanced and terminal degrees in music, as well as decades of real-world experience in worship ministry.
The Liberty University School of Music features 50 state-of-the-art practice rooms, smart classrooms, and a world-class concert hall. It also features the 1,600-square-foot Mathena Recording Studio, which offers an extraordinary level of music production options and studio project services for students and professional artists, alike.
The degree requires a local practicum and an extensive internship experience within worship ministry.
You will need to pass the Sophomore Review in order to be accepted into the program’s upper-level training.
Academics: Music & Worship – Business (B.S.)
Featured Business Courses
Acts (BIBL 364)
Old and New Testament Music and Worship (MUSC 202)
Commercial Music Techniques for Worship (MUSC 302)
Financial Accounting (ACCT 211)
Business Law (BUSI 301)
Career Opportunities: Music & Worship – Business Graduates
Director of Worship Technology
Worship and Missions Director
Contemporary Christian Artist
Director of Worship and Drama
Associate Director of Worship Programming
Director of Worship Conferences
Music Minister
Music and Worship Evangelist
Worship Leader or Pastor
Director of Worship Arts"
"https://www.liberty.edu/health-sciences/bachelors/physical-education-health/","Residential Physical Education & Health Program
The purpose of the Bachelor of Science in Physical Education & Health program is to promote the development of a healthy, physically-active, Christ-centered lifestyle. The program prepares its graduates to become competent, problem-solving, and innovative professionals interested in pursuing licensure through graduate studies or working with children in non-academic settings.
The program is non-licensure and prepares students to either pursue licensure through a master’s degree program or work in a variety of non-academic positions. Examples of non-academic jobs include sports program directors, youth camp directors, athletic administrators, & refereeing/coaching.
The B.S. in Physical Education & Health is offered through the Department of Allied Health Professions.
Teach Physical Education with Your B.Ed. Degree
Turn your passion for healthful living into a fulfilling teaching career. With a Bachelor of Education (B.Ed) degree in Health & Physical Education Education P-12, you can get the licensure you need to teach in this field.
Learn more about the B.Ed. 
Academics
Career Opportunities
Physical Education (PE) Teacher
Health Education Teacher
Director of Youth Camps/Sports Programs
Coach/Referee
Athletic Administrator
For more information, contact Dr. Eric Brubaker, Physical Education & Health program director at evbrubak@liberty.edu
Start Your Career in Physical Education & Health"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/arts-and-sciences/bachelors/physics/","Get Your Career Started with an Online Physics Degree from Liberty University
If you enjoy analyzing a situation, figuring out how machines work, or experimenting with new ideas, then a career in physics may be the right fit for you. Liberty University offers a 100% online Bachelor of Science in Physics that can help you meet your professional goals.
Physics is a versatile science that places a heavy emphasis on logic, reason, and problem-solving. While these skills can be applied to a variety of fields, our physics degree specifically prepares you for roles as a mechanical engineer, particle accelerator operator, data analyst, physicist, and more. By partnering with Liberty, you can start your career in physics, meet your professional goals, and make an impact on the scientific community.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online Degree in Physics?
Choosing where to pursue your degree is an important decision. You need a program that can help you meet your career goals and an institution that aligns with your beliefs. Here are some of the reasons Liberty stands out:
Liberty University is accredited by SACSCOC, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges.
Our B.S. in Physics is the first bachelor’s degree of its kind to be offered 100% online.
The professors in this program have real-life experience in analytics, engineering, laboratory work, and other related fields.
Each of your courses will be taught from a Christian perspective – so you can graduate knowing how to incorporate biblical principles into your work.
Our online format gives you the flexibility to devote time to your family, work, and other responsibilities while earning your degree.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Bachelor’s in Physics?
Your physics degree can prepare you with knowledge in mathematics, mechanics, thermodynamics, electricity, and more. You can learn all you need to start your career as a physicist or another related position. Plus, you will complete a capstone course that will help you take all that you have learned and turn it into a research project that synthesizes your knowledge.
Upon graduation, you will be able to:
Systematically explore physical phenomena by setting up experiments, collecting and analyzing data, and interpreting the results.
Understand fundamental physics principles as well as foundational concepts within its branches of mechanics, electromagnetism, thermodynamics, and quantum mechanics.
Understand how the cosmos and laws of physics support a creator and biblical worldview.
Use mathematical techniques for problem-solving.
Featured Courses
MATH 430 – Multivariable Calculus
PHYS 331 – Electricity and Magnetism
PHYS 432 – Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics
PHYS 433 – Quantum Physics
Highlights of Our B.S. in Physics Online Degree
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your physics online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we are committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
Gain the technical knowledge and research skills you’ll need to work as a physicist – all 100% online!
The bachelor of physics can be completed in just 3.5 years.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/physics/","Help Students Understand the Forces of Physics by Earning a Bachelor’s Degree in Physics Education
Are you fascinated with things like electricity, magnetism, and mechanics? Maybe you love to take something apart and put it back together so you can figure out how it works. If that sounds like you, then you might have a passion for physics — a passion you’ll want to share, teach, and inspire in the next generation.
Liberty University’s online Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in Physics Education (6-12) can help you get there. Our degree can help you gain the tools you need to become an educator in today’s world — including a teaching license. Partner with us today and make a positive impact on your future students.
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s Online B.Ed. Degree in Physics Education?
Choosing where to pursue your degree is a major decision. At Liberty, we believe that we can help you get where you need to go. Our program can help you gain cutting-edge knowledge, hands-on experience, and a teaching license approved by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE).
Here are some of the benefits of choosing Liberty University for your physics teaching degree:
Practical Learning | You can gain hands-on experience by completing 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
Flexibility | Your courses are all offered in a 100% online, 8-week format with the exception of your practicum and student teaching hours, which can be completed at a school near you.
Integrity | All of our courses are taught from a Christian perspective, so you can graduate prepared to teach your students ethically and with biblical principles in mind.
What Will You Learn in Our Physics B.Ed. Courses Online?
Throughout this Bachelor of Education program, you will be taught foundational skills and subjects that can be applied to nearly any profession — like oral and written communication, mathematics, psychology, and Christian ethics. You will also learn how to successfully teach middle school and high school students. In particular, you’ll study how to teach in the discipline of physics.
Your education courses will help you understand core aspects of classroom teaching. You’ll explore teaching methods, instructional design, curriculum development, and methods for engaging with different types of learners. You will also have the opportunity to put all of this knowledge into practice during your practicum and student teaching hours.
Your physics courses can help equip you to effectively teach this subject to your students. Some of the topics you’ll study include:
Electricity and magnetism
Mechanics
Numerical methods in physics
Thermodynamics and statistical mechanics
Wave optics
Featured Courses
EDUC 360 – Foundations of Education
PHYS 305 – Introduction to Modern Physics
PHYS 331 – Electricity and Magnetism
PHYS 440 – Wave Optics
Highlights of Liberty’s Online B.Ed. in Physics Education Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your B.Ed. online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Pursue licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia.
Complete 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
Observe and teach in a variety of school settings with your required practicum and student teaching hours.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/education/bachelors/bed/physics-earth-science/","Use the Sciences to Inspire Students by Earning a Physics and Earth Science Education Degree
If you have a love for science and want to use your passion to educate the next generation, then a Bachelor of Education (B.Ed) is for you! This degree can help you learn the fundamentals of teaching, gain classroom experience, and earn your teaching license. You can take your interests and turn them into a career that changes lives and positively impacts the future.
Liberty University’s Bachelor of Education in Physics Education – Earth Science (6-12) can give you all the tools and experience you’ll need to become a successful middle school or high school science teacher. Are you ready to help young people live up to their full potential? If so, partner with us – we can help you earn the credentials you’ll need to inspire your future students.
Upon successful completion of Liberty University’s Virginia state-approved Bachelor of Education program, you may apply for your teaching license in another state through reciprocity, which may or may not result in additional requirements based on your state’s Department of Education regulations.
Why Choose Liberty’s B.Ed. in Physics Education – Earth Science Degree?
Choosing where to pursue your degree is an important decision. At Liberty, we believe that we can help you get where you need to go. Our program can provide you with cutting-edge knowledge and techniques, hands-on experience, and a teaching license approved by the Virginia Department of Education (VDOE).
Here are some of the benefits of choosing Liberty University for your education degree:
Practical Learning | You can gain hands-on experience by completing 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching prior to graduation.
Flexibility | Your courses are all offered in a 100% online, 8-week format. Your practicum and student teaching can be completed at a school near you.
Integrity | Each of our courses is taught from a Christian perspective, so you can graduate prepared to teach your students ethically and with biblical principles in mind.
What Will You Learn in Our Physics and Earth Science Education Degree?
Throughout your Bachelor of Education, you will be taught foundational skills and subjects that can be applied to nearly any profession – like oral and written communication, mathematics, psychology, and Christian ethics. You will also gain the competence to teach middle school and high school students successfully. And you can be prepared to teach in the disciplines of physics and earth science.
Your education courses can equip you with the knowledge and skills for classroom teaching. You’ll learn teaching methods, instructional design, curriculum development, and how to engage with different types of learners. You will also have the opportunity to put all of this knowledge into practice during your practicum and student teaching hours.
Your physics and earth science courses can give you the knowledge needed to teach these subjects effectively to your students. Some of the topics you’ll study include:
Astronomy
Electricity and magnetism
Mineralogy and petrology
Quantum physics
Thermodynamics and statistical mechanics
Wave optics
Featured Courses
EDUC 360 – Foundations of Education
PHSC 210 – Elements of Earth Science
PHSC 311 – Oceanography
PHYS 305 – Introduction to Modern Physics
Highlights of Liberty’s B.Ed. Online in Physics Education — Earth Science
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your B.Ed. online degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we have frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University’s School of Education meets rigorous national standards for educator preparation set by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP).
Through the B.Ed., you can graduate with licensure credentials to teach in the state of Virginia.
By completing 90 practicum hours and at least 1 full semester of student teaching, you will walk away with valuable hands-on experience.
You will observe and teach in a variety of school settings with your required practicum and student teaching hours.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/music/bachelors/piano-performance/","Residential Piano Performance Program
The Bachelor of Music in Piano Performance degree includes 24 hours of applied music studies, two semesters of conducting, music technology, improvisation studies, and contemporary styles survey. At least 65% of the degree is specifically devoted to music studies.
The B.M. in Piano Performance also requires students to complete junior and senior piano recitals which showcase the development of the students in all areas of their musicianship.
Academics: Piano Performance (B.M.)
Featured Piano Performance Courses
Harmonic Practices and Theory I (MUSC 105)
Keyboard Pedagogy (MUSC 304)
Music History: Antiquity–1750 (MUSC 311)
Basic Conducting (MUSC 315)
Commercial Improvisation Techniques (MUSC 360)
Career Opportunities: Piano Performance Graduates
Accompanist
Collaborative pianist
Professional musician
Private music teacher
Music therapist (requires graduate study)"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/government/bachelors/political-science/","Become an Effective Political Leader with a Bachelor’s Degree in Political Science
Politics is one of the most powerful forces in today’s world. It affects almost every part of our lives, from how much we pay in taxes to the amount of money we spend on gas. People who work in government have a huge impact on the course of the world, so it is essential that these individuals are able to lead with wisdom, skill, and virtue.
If you are interested in a career that lets you influence political decisions and craft public policy, Liberty University’s online B.S. in Political Science is a great next step to take in your academic and professional journey. Our program can help equip you with the knowledge and skills you’ll need to serve as a Champion for Christ in the public sphere.
Maybe you dream of becoming a politician — or perhaps you want to do behind-the-scenes political work as a pollster or legislative assistant. Whatever your career goals are, our bachelor’s in political science can help prepare you to lead with excellence in the world of politics. You can gain both practical skills and ethical training that can help you fulfill your calling as a Christ-centered political leader, scholar, or policymaker. Partner with us and learn how to shape public policy and influence the world for Christ.
Why Choose Our Political Science Degree Online?
Comprehensive Curriculum | By working in politics, you can make a positive impact on the lives of countless people by protecting and promoting freedom, justice, and human rights. To accomplish this goal, you’ll need to learn the historical and philosophical underpinnings of political science as well as gain a firm grasp on practical methods for conducting political affairs. Our political science program can help you understand the theoretical and practical aspects of government and help train you for success in a variety of career paths.
Experienced Faculty | Our government courses are taught by seasoned professors who have years of experience working in political affairs. Drawing on what they have learned in their own careers, they can help you gain the skills you need to stand out in the highly competitive political realm. Our faculty are knowledgeable and dedicated to helping you achieve excellence in your spiritual, academic, and professional life.
Flexibility | Our goal is to help you pursue your bachelor’s degree in a way that fits your lifestyle. That’s why we’ve designed our political science program to be entirely online. You can log into your courses on your own time and access your study materials from the comfort of your own home. Most importantly, you can stay invested in your family, job, church, and community while still achieving your academic goals.
Christian Principles | What sets Liberty apart from other schools that offer political science degrees? Our professors won’t just teach you on-the-job skills — they can also help foster your spiritual growth. We are dedicated to Training Champions for Christ, so your political science courses will be taught from a Christian worldview. That way, you can learn how to integrate biblical principles with industry best practices in the workplace.
What Will You Learn in Liberty University’s Political Science Program?
Our political science courses cover both the theoretical and the practical aspects of politics and government. You’ll explore the theories, methodologies, and subfields of political science and examine how political science is connected to other fields, such as history and economics. You can also learn how to evaluate political systems and ideologies using philosophical and social science methods.
Many of our government courses focus specifically on politics within the United States. You’ll receive a comprehensive introduction to American political processes, constitutional history, foreign policy, and exceptionalism. Additionally, you’ll learn about topics that apply to politics on a global scale, including international relations, resilient nations, comparative politics, and contemporary political issues. Throughout this program, you will explore how Christian values have influenced Western political theory and why limited government is so important.
Partner with us and prepare to lead with Christ-like love and humility in the world of politics.
Featured Courses
GOVT 210 – Introduction to Political Science
GOVT 328 – American Political Processes
GOVT 340 – International Relations
GOVT 425 – American Foreign Policy 
Highlights of Our Online Political Science Program
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online B.S. in Political Science degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years — and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on textbooks!
Our political science courses online are only 8 weeks long with 8 different start dates offered each year and no set login times.
You can transfer in up to 75% of the total credit hours needed to earn this political science degree.
This degree can be completed in under 4 years.
As a political science major at Liberty, you’ll have access to a wide variety of resources through our top-notch research portal."
"https://www.liberty.edu/behavioral-sciences/psychology/bachelors/psychology/","BS in Psychology
Residential Program in Psychology
The Psychology Department offers a Bachelor of Science in Psychology degree with eleven cognates. The study of psychology will teach students to interpret and influence human behavior, interactions, and thinking so that God is served and honored.
The Psychology (B.S.) degree is also offered online
Student Testimonial
Academics
Credit Hours
120
Program of Study
Psychology (B.S.) – Resident
Psychology Programs
Addictions and Recovery – Online
Child Life Specialist – Residential
Christian Counseling – Online
Counseling – Residential
Criminal Psychology – Residential & Online
Crisis Counseling – Online
Developmental Psychology – Residential & Online
Industrial/Organizational Psychology – Residential
Life Coaching – Online
Military Resilience – Online
Sport Psychology – Residential
Courses You Could Take
Social Psychology (PSYC 312)
Psychology of Personality (PSYC 341)
Statistics in Psychology (PSYC 355)
Abnormal Psychology (PSYC 430)
Admission Requirements
View Liberty’s undergraduate admissions requirements
Start Your Career in Psychology
Career Opportunities for the B.S. in Psychology
Child Development
Treatment Centers
Private Practice
Residential Treatment
Child Life Specialist
Group Homes
Church Counseling
Human Resources
Substance Abuse
Court Advocate"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/psychology/","Prepare for Whatever Lies Ahead with an Online Psychology Degree 
The field of psychology can be rewarding, interesting, and versatile. As one of our most popular undergraduate programs, Liberty’s Bachelor of Science (BS) in Psychology can help prepare you for a variety of career or graduate school tracks. What will a degree in psychology do for you?
With flexible 8-week courses and no set login times
So you can earn your bachelor’s in psychology in just 3.5 years
For full-time, online bachelor’s degree students
Psychology Courses That Prepare You for Graduate School
A bachelor’s degree in psychology is an essential step on your path to completing a graduate degree. If you are passionate about becoming a licensed clinical psychologist, you will need to complete a master’s or doctoral program before you can practice.
That’s why Liberty University’s 100% online Bachelor of Science (BS) in Psychology focuses on helping you meet graduate prerequisites by incorporating statistics and research into your degree.
Focus on Skills That Increase Your Marketability
A BS in Psychology online in no way restricts you to becoming a clinical psychologist. Because psychology is focused on understanding people and creating real-world solutions, your skill set can help qualify you for diverse career options.
With courses in writing and human behavior and development, your studies can be applicable to almost any industry — from advertising and sports to forensics and industrial-organizational sectors.
You want more out of your job — more opportunities for personal and professional growth. Choosing to complete a bachelor of psychology is a great way to get more. Partner with Liberty University and pursue an online psychology degree to gain the knowledge you need to help people overcome adversity, increase well-being, and achieve their goals.
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America.
Why Choose Liberty University’s Bachelor of Science in Psychology Online Degree?
If you’re interested in understanding the human mind, then an online BS in Psychology is a great degree choice!
Choosing Liberty University’s online psychology degree means developing a skill set to help people of all ages navigate hardship while honing your research skills as you learn the psychology behind why people do what they do.
Completing your bachelor’s degree online with Liberty gives you a level of flexibility that on-campus courses lack. Our psychology courses are offered 100% online in 8-week course formats with no set login times. By creating your own schedule, you can invest in higher education without putting your career and family life on hold.
If you are not sure which one of our specializations fits your career goals best, or you would like to mix and match courses from different specializations, you can choose our general psychology track. This option allows you to complete various electives of your choice. If you’re torn between 2 specializations that you’re interested in, this online psychology degree allows you to pursue both!
Is a bachelor’s in psychology worth it?
Depending on your personal and professional goals, yes – a bachelor’s in psychology may very well be a decision that is worthwhile for you. There are several benefits to earning a BS in Psychology.
First, earning a BS in Psychology is an excellent way to prepare yourself for future graduate studies. With a BS in Psychology, you could pursue a master’s degree in counseling, business, education, and much more! A bachelor’s degree in psychology can also help prepare you for several career paths – including research, community relations, advocacy, and case management."
"https://www.liberty.edu/behavioral-sciences/psychology/bachelors/psychology/child-life-specialist/","Residential Child Life Specialist Program (B.S.)
Prepare to excel in your future career with a Bachelor of Science in Psychology: Child Life Specialist degree from Liberty University. Develop an understanding of child psychology and gain valuable hands-on experience as you get ready for a career as a child life professional. This program meets the educational requirements for you to apply for a Child Life Specialist certification.
Learn the skills you’ll need to help children and families in hospital settings. And equip yourself with the practical skills you need to help clients walk through traumatic medical illnesses and injuries.
Gain knowledge from professors who are grounded in their Christian faith and have expertise in:
Play Therapy
End-of-Life Care
Developmental Psychology
Family Therapy
Liberty’s Department of Psychology provides lab rooms for you to engage with applied studies. These rooms are equipped with audio and video recording technology for instructor review and feedback. And the PSYC 499 Internship gives you the opportunity to shadow a professional in the field and gain applied learning through experience. 
Academic Information for the B.S. in Psychology: Child Life Specialist
Featured Child Life Specialist Courses
Therapy and Theory of Play in Early Childhood (FACS 361)
Psychology of Childhood (PSYC 221)
Marriage and Family (PSYC 361)
Children in Healthcare (PSYC 450)
Start Your Career in Psychology
Career Opportunities for Child Life Specialist Program Graduates
Child Life Specialist
Child Protection Worker
Day Treatment Specialist
Direct Care Worker
Family Service Worker
Social Service Coordinator"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/psychology/christian-counseling/","Use the Hope of Christ to Support Others with an Online BS in Psychology – Christian Counseling Degree
Do you recognize that there is a need for qualified counselors who can be a safe place and source of healing to others? With a spirit of love and compassion, you’re probably interested in a way to help those who need it. Liberty University’s online Christian counseling degree program can help you gain the knowledge and skills you need to counsel others.
Throughout our bachelor’s in Christian counseling degree online, you can develop your counseling skills. You can gain an understanding of human behavior and development grounded in biblical principles and leading research.
Our 100% online programs allow you to continue to work and devote time to your family and community without worrying about attending on-campus courses. If you dream of joining biblical counselors in helping others reach spiritual, emotional, and mental health, then Liberty’s online Christian counseling degree is for you!
What is Christian counseling?
As a Christian therapist, you can be more prepared to integrate psychological theories with biblical principles to encourage your clients to grow in their relationship with God. In this field, professionals have the opportunity to directly integrate Christian ideas and theology into their counseling sessions.
Why Choose Liberty’s Christian Psychology Degree Online?
At Liberty University, our mission is Training Champions for Christ. Our biblical counseling degree online has been designed to integrate your faith into your professional life. Our core psychology curriculum is enhanced with a Christian counseling specialization to provide you with everything you need for success. 
As a pioneer in distance education since 1985, we understand what it takes to design a flexible and affordable online degree program that will challenge you to learn new concepts without pulling you away from the things that matter most – like your job, family, and community. Whether you are interested in using our online psychology degree to prepare for graduate school, to simply learn more about the human mind, or to pursue job opportunities upon graduation, our BS in Psychology – Christian Counseling can help. 
Here’s why our online psychology degree in Christian counseling stands out:
Curriculum
With our online psychology classes, you will gain the background you need to understand counseling theory and how the human mind works. Our online Christian psychology degree can then equip you with the practical skills and knowledge needed as a counselor.
Faculty
Our professors have real-world experience in counseling and are passionate about preparing you to serve others with excellence. They can teach you to use your faith to promote emotional and mental health.
Foundational Training
In order to become a licensed counselor, you typically need to complete a master’s degree and some clinical experience. Our online Christian counseling program can lay the foundation you need to be successful in your future education.
What Will You Learn in the BS in Psychology – Christian Counseling Degree Online Program?
Liberty’s online Christian counseling degree can equip you with the knowledge and experience you need to offer non-licensure biblical counseling to your future clients and help transform their spiritual, emotional, and mental health. We pair critical psychology classes with specialized Christian counseling courses to provide you with the theoretical and applicational knowledge you need to serve your clients effectively. 
Our psychology classes cover a variety of topics that will help you succeed as a counselor, including:
Behavior management
Human learning principles
Physiological psychology
Psychological research techniques
Social psychology theories
The impact of culture on the effectiveness of different counseling approaches
The use of statistics in psychology
Theories on the origin and development of personality
With this foundation, you can be more prepared to address many human concerns and issues from a scientific and a biblical perspective.
Additionally, this program provides you with practical skills in the form of an optional internship, so you can receive hands-on training in counseling prior to graduation. You can also personalize your degree with some of the available counseling elective courses. Whether you’re planning to go into child and adolescent, trauma, crisis, or marriage counseling, there is an elective for you.
Featured Courses 
CCOU 202 – Issues of Christian Counseling
CCOU 301 – Christian Counseling for Marriage and Family
CCOU 302 – Christian Counseling for Children
PSYC 420 – Psychology and Christianity
“Liberty’s program allowed me to get an accredited psychology degree at my convenience. The schedule was flexible, and the online library resources were awesome. I am now receiving an extra 6% [pay increase] at work because of my Liberty degree. I grew both intellectually and spiritually because of Liberty’s emphasis on education from a Christian perspective.”
– Robert N. Betancourt, B.S. in Psychology Student
Our Christian Counseling Degree Online Program Highlights
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your bachelor’s in Christian counseling degree online from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting. Our online, affordable Christian counseling degree makes it possible for you to get the education you need to transform the lives of others for Christ.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-2,000 per year on your Christian psychology books!
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
As an online student, you will have the opportunity to network with leaders and experts in Christian counseling from across the country.
Honor Society and Additional Certificates for Our Christian Counseling Degree Online
Did you know Liberty University has a Psi Chi Honor Society chapter? Learn more about membership opportunities.
Liberty University has worked closely with the American Association of Christian Counselors (AACC) to offer certificates of completion for many of our psychology courses.
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
"https://www.liberty.edu/online/behavioral-sciences/bachelors/psychology/addictions-recovery/","Help Free People from Substance Abuse with an Addiction Psychology Degree 
Do you feel drawn to helping people who are struggling with addiction? Trained professionals are needed who can help people develop healthy coping mechanisms and heal from past trauma. Get the education, training, and tools you need to help addicted individuals recover. Liberty University’s 100% online B.S. in Psychology – Addictions and Recovery degree can help.
Our online addictions and recovery bachelor’s degree program has been created with your success in mind. We combine quality academics with flexibility and affordability so you can get the most out of your degree. This degree can be completed in just 3.5 years. And since it’s 100% online, you can complete your coursework whenever and wherever is most convenient for you.
“Liberty’s program allowed me to get an accredited psychology degree at my convenience. The schedule was flexible, and the online library resources were awesome. I am now receiving an extra 6% at work because of my Liberty degree. I grew both intellectually and spiritually because of Liberty’s emphasis on education from a Christian perspective.”
– Robert N. Betancourt, B.S. in Psychology
How much do substance abuse counselors make?
What can you do with a degree in addictions psychology?
What is the best online program for substance abuse psychology?
What is the role of an addictions counselor?
Why Choose Liberty’s Bachelor’s Degree in the Psychology of Addictive Behaviors?
At Liberty University, our mission is Training Champions for Christ. Our online bachelor’s degree in psychology, addiction, and recovery will help you integrate biblical principles into your career. You can become a professional of integrity who will make a positive impact in the lives of others. 
This program is flexible enough to meet the diverse needs of our students. Our addictions and recovery psychology degree may be right for you if:
You are currently working in substance abuse treatment and need or want to earn a bachelor’s.
You want to start a career in substance abuse counseling and services.
You want to pursue a graduate degree that will lead to a counseling license and need a foundation in psychology.
What Will You Learn in Our Online Substance Abuse Classes?
In our addiction and recovery degree program, you can learn how to assess, diagnose, and develop treatment plans for those who are struggling with addiction and substance dependence. You will also receive training on providing interventions with understanding and compassion that are centered on the client.
With this degree, you can build a strong foundation in scientific and faith-based principles. Some of the courses you will take include Social Psychology and The Integration of Psychology and Christianity.
It is important to approach individuals with addictions from a holistic perspective. You will study the psychological, biological, and socio-cultural issues that affect the behaviors of an addict.
Featured Courses
PSYC 305 – Overview of Theory and Treatment of Substance Abuse
PSYC 312 – Social Psychology
PSYC 420 – Psychology and Christianity
Highlights of Our Online Psychology Degree in Addictions and Recovery
We are recognized by multiple institutions for our academic quality, affordability, and accessibility. Our commitment to excellence also helped us rank among Niche.com’s top 3 online schools in America. Earning your online psychology addiction degree from a nonprofit university with this kind of recognition can help set you apart from others in your field.
Your success is our success, which is why we’re committed to providing quality academics at an affordable tuition rate. While other colleges are increasing their tuition, we’ve frozen tuition rates for our undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs for the past 8 years – and counting.
To continue our mission of providing affordable education, electronic textbooks are provided for all undergraduate courses at no cost to you. As a full-time student, this could save you an estimated $800-$2,000 per year on textbooks!
Liberty University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC).
As an online student, you will have the opportunity to network with leaders and experts in the addiction and recovery process from across the country.
Students in the online bachelor’s degree in psychology program who complete PSYC 450 – Children in Healthcare will be eligible to pursue their Child Life Specialist Certification. During this course, students can learn basic principles for human development and the psychological well-being of children as well as prepare for the certification exam.
Liberty University has a Psi Chi Honor Society chapter. Learn more about membership opportunities.
Liberty University has worked closely with the American Association of Christian Counselors (AACC) to offer certificates of completion for many of our online psychology classes. For a complete list of courses, contact one of our admissions counselors today!
*Some restrictions may occur for this promotion to apply. This promotion also excludes active faculty and staff, military, Non-Degree Seeking, DGIA, Continuing Education, WSB, and Certificates.
Apply FREE This Week*"
